No. RT-1 1036/1212024-MVL Government of lndia Ministry of Road Transport and Highways (MVL Section) Transport Bhawan, 1, Parliament Street, New Delhi-110001 Dated thell February, 2024 To, 1. The Transport Commissioner of all the States and Union Territories 2. The Director General of Police of all States/UTs Subject: Disruption in license related services on Sarathi portal - reg. 5ir/Madam, It has come to the notice of this Ministry that due to infrastructure related issues in Sarathi portal (https:i/sa rathi. pariva ha n.gov. in ) from 31st January, 2024 to 12th February, 2024, applicants have faced disruptions in availing license related services. ln order to sustain the load and run the services at RTO ofFices, the portal (online services) was partially disabled for the citizens so that the RTOS can function without over load problems. Owing to partial shutdown/disabling of online services, the applicants were not able to apply for services such as payment of fee, renewal of driving licence, booking slot for learner's licence, driving skill test, etc. 2. Considering the difficulties faced by the citizens during the period of disruption of services through PARIVAHAN portal and further that the citizens are not put to inconvenience, it has been decided that the validity of learner's licence, driving license and conductor license which have expired between 31st January, 2024 and 15th February,2024, would be treated as valid without levying any penalty up to 29th February, 2024. Enforcement authorities are also advised to treat such documents valid till 29th February, 2424. 3, All the States and Union Territories are requested to implement this advisory in letter and spirit. Yours fa ithfully, )z)h n t ugar Director( lvlVL) Ph. No: 0LL-237245L5 e-mail: ankit.duga 11986@gov. in Copy to: - 1. Shri Joydeep Shome, DDG & HOD, NIC 2. B Venkata Reddy, DDG & Head-SARATHI, NIC (