Motor Vehicles Aggregator Guidelines 2025 1 Motor Vehicle Aggregator Guidelines 2025 Table of Contents Preamble ............................................................................................... 2 Who this report might be relevant ................................................................ 3 Motor Vehicles Aggregator Guidelines 2025 .................................................... 4 1. Definitions ..................................................................................... 4 2. Applicability of the Guidelines ............................................................ 6 3. Designated Portal by the Central Government ......................................... 6 4. Application for grant or renewal of Licence and matters connected therewith . 6 5. Licence fee .................................................................................... 7 6. Security Deposit .............................................................................. 7 7. Validity of Licence, its renewal and matters connected therewith ................ 7 8. Eligibility for obtaining a Licence ......................................................... 8 9. Conditions for Grant of Licence ........................................................... 8 10. lnduction Training Programme ............................................................ 9 11. Compliances with regard to drivers .....................................................10 12. Permit .........................................................................................12 13. Compliances with regard to vehicles ....................................................12 14. Compliance with regard to Website, App and technology...........................13 15. Compliances to ensure safety of passengers ...........................................15 16. Non-discrimination policy to be followed by the aggregator .......................15 17. Regulation of Fare ..........................................................................15 18. Cancellation of Rides .......................................................................16 19. Penalty ........................................................................................17 20. Sustainable Fleet Management by aggregators ........................................17 21. Inclusion of Divyangjan Fleet .............................................................17 22. Conversion to Electric Mobility ...........................................................17 23. Aggregation of non-transport motorcycles by aggregators ..........................17 24. Suspension of aggregator Licence ........................................................18 25. Cancellation and Surrender of aggregator Licence ...................................19 26. Appeal .........................................................................................20 27. Powers of the State Government ........................................................20 FORM I .................................................................................................21 FORM II ................................................................................................23 FORM III ...............................................................................................25 2 Motor Vehicle Aggregator Guidelines 2025 Preamble In 2020, the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways issued the “Motor Vehicle Aggregator Guidelines 2020” under

## of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988. The said Guidelines provided a regulatory framework for State Governments to issue licences and regulate aggregators in the road transport sector. Since 2020, India’s shared mobility ecosystem has undergone rapid and significant change. The rise in demand for diverse and flexible mobility solutions including bike-sharing, introduction of electric vehicles (EVs), and auto-rickshaw rides, has widened the consumer base. As the travel preferences evolve, aggregators have expanded their services to meet these new demands through innovative models. The Motor Vehicle Aggregator Guidelines 2020 have been revised to keep the regulatory framework up to date with the developments in the motor vehicles aggregator ecosystem. The new guidelines attempt to provide a light-touch regulatory system while attending to issues of safety & security of the user and the welfare of the driver. State Governments may adopt these revised guidelines within three (3) months from date of their issue and may include provisions in addition to the ones specified herein. 3 Motor Vehicle Aggregator Guidelines 2025 Who this report might be relevant 4 Motor Vehicle Aggregator Guidelines 2025 Motor Vehicles Aggregator Guidelines 2025 1. Definitions 1.1 In these Guidelines, unless the context otherwise requires,- i) “Act” means the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988. ii) "Aggregator" shall have the meaning ascribed to it under sub section (1A) of

## of the Act. vii) "Contract" means the agreement between the aggregator and the driver specifying the rights and obligations of both parties for providing services to a passenger through the App of such aggregator. viii) “Designated Portal” means the portal established and notified as such under Clause 3 of these guidelines. ix) “Driver Fare” means such part of the fare payable by aggregator to the driver for the services rendered to the passenger through the App in undertaking a journey, including any cost of toll(s) and parking fee(s) paid by the driver. x) "Dynamic pricing" means the output of the fare algorithm of the fare of the aggregator, which raises the price of a journey when demand for trips exceeds supply of. xi) "Fare" means the total charges payable by the passenger to the driver or the aggregator, as the case may be, pursuant to the passenger availing the transportation services on the aggregator platform through the App for a journey, including the cost of toll(s), the tax(es) and parking fee(s), as may be applicable. xii) "Form" means a form appended to these guidelines. 5 Motor Vehicle Aggregator Guidelines 2025 xiii) “Grievance Officer” means a person appointed by the aggregator for redressal of grievance of any passenger or driver. xiv) “Induction Training Programme” means the induction training program referred to in Clause (10) of these guidelines. xv) “Journey” means a trip whether undertaken or not, on a specified date and time from the place of departure, to the destination, and may include the type or class of the motor vehicle being used to undertake the travel plan. xvi) "Licence" means the licence issued to an aggregator under

## of the Act. xvii) “Licence Fee” means the fee payable under Clause 5 of these guidelines. xviii) "On-Board" together with its grammatical variations, means the process of registering drivers and vehicles on the digital platform by the aggregator. xix) "Off-Board" together with its grammatical variations, means the process of deregistering the driver and vehicle on the digital platform by the aggregator. xx) "Passenger" means a person who uses the app of the aggregator to undertake a journey. xxi) "Rating" means an assessment of the quality of a journey undertaken by a passenger, basis the parameters specified by the aggregator. xxii) "Refresher Training Programme and Assessment" means a training session for drivers integrated with the aggregator, for a period of at least forty eight (48) hours and for a duration of 10 hours in one continuous session, delivered in-person and in virtual training sessions. xxiii) "Security Deposit" means the amount that is payable by an aggregator, to be submitted along with licence fee, furnished in the form of a bank guarantee or an insurance surety bond. 1.2 Words and expressions as defined and mentioned under these guidelines shall have the same meaning as ascribed under the Act. 6 Motor Vehicle Aggregator Guidelines 2025 2. Applicability of the Guidelines 2.1 The applicability of these guidelines extends to any aggregator operating within a State. 2.2 These guidelines shall not be applicable to entities that limit themselves to the provision of an interoperable network to aggregators licensed by the Competent Authority and do not directly undertake onboarding of drivers or motor vehicles or both. 2.3 These guidelines shall not be applicable to entities that are engaged in the sale of tickets for travel by public service vehicles. 3. Designated Portal by the Central Government The Central Government shall develop and designate a portal to enable for single window clearance of application for licence as aggregator including receipt of appropriate application fee, license fee and security deposit: Provided that till such time this portal is developed and operationalized, the State Governments shall process applications for license, in accordance with the extant guidelines. 4. Application for grant or renewal of Licence and matters connected therewith 4.1 An application for grant of Licence shall be made on the designated portal under clause 3 above, in Form I, by any person eligible under the criteria mentioned under clause 8 below. This application shall be accompanied by proof of online payment of an application fee, as may be determined by the State Government by way of a notification. 4.2 One application shall be made by an aggregator for all or any types or classes of motor vehicles on-boarded by it. 4.3 One licence shall be granted by the Competent Authority for issue of the Licence throughout the territorial jurisdiction of the State. 4.4 An application made under sub-clause (4.1) shall be decided by the Competent Authority within a period of ninety (90) days from the date of such application in Form I. 4.5 If the applicant does not comply with any of the conditions for grant of licence specified under these guidelines, as may be determined by the Competent Authority, he may reject such application with reasons to be recorded in writing after giving a hearing to the aggregator. 7 Motor Vehicle Aggregator Guidelines 2025 4.6 On being satisfied that the applicant has complied with all the conditions specified for grant of a licence under these guidelines, the Competent Authority shall direct the applicant to pay the appropriate licence fee and security deposit within a period of thirty (30) days. 4.7 On payment of the licence fee and security deposit, the Competent Authority shall grant a licence to the applicant in Form III appended to these guidelines, within the period of fifteen (15) days from the date of payment. 4.8 The licence issued by the Competent Authority under these guidelines shall be uploaded and updated by the Competent Authority on the designated portal. 5. Licence fee The licence fee payable by the aggregator shall be as follows: Sr. No. Particulars Amount in Rupees 1. Grant of Licence to aggregator 5,00,000 2. Renewal of Licence 25,000 3. For noting change of address of the licencee 25,000 6. Security Deposit The security deposit to be provided by the aggregator shall be as follows: Sr. No. Particulars Amount in Rupees 1. Up to 100 buses or 1000 other motor vehicles 10,00,000 2. Up to 1000 buses or 10000 other motor vehicles 25,00,000 3. More than 1000 buses or 10000 other motor vehicles 50,00,000 7. Validity of Licence, its renewal and matters connected therewith 7.1 A licence shall be valid for a period of five (5) years from the date of its issue. 7.2 Pursuant to an application in Form II, appended to these guidelines, a Licence may be renewed by the Competent Authority, for a period of five (05) years, subject to compliance with conditions for renewal. For the purposes of such renewal, the Competent Authority shall examine: i) the aggregator’s records of compliance with these guidelines, and 8 Motor Vehicle Aggregator Guidelines 2025 ii) the punitive actions taken against the aggregator, in the State where application is made. 8. Eligibility for obtaining a Licence 8.1 The applicant shall be a company registered under the Companies Act, 2013 or a limited liability partnership under the Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008 or a co-operative society formed by an association of drivers or motor vehicle owners and registered under the Co-operative Societies Act, 1912. 8.2 The applicant shall comply with the applicable law, including but not limited to, the Act or rules and regulations made under the Act, the Digital Personal Data Protection Act, 2023, the Consumer Protection Act, 2019 and the Information Technology Act, 2000 and intermediary guidelines issued thereunder. 9. Conditions for Grant of Licence An aggregator submitting an application for obtaining a licence shall ensure compliance with the following: 9.1 The aggregator shall conduct or cause to be conducted an Induction Training Programme as detailed under Clause 10 before on-boarding a driver and also for those drivers on-boarded prior to issuance of these guidelines. 9.2 The aggregator shall provide a written intimation of the commencement of services to the Competent Authority and the same shall be updated within a period of six (6) months from the date of grant of Licence, failing which the Licence may be cancelled by the Competent Authority. 9.3 Seventy two (72) hours prior to commencement of services, the aggregator shall intimate the competent authority, and the said intimation shall be uploaded on the designated portal by the competent authority. 9.4 The guidelines, if any, issued by the Central Government or the respective State Government in respect of health or public safety shall be followed by the aggregator and the on-boarded drivers. 9.5 The aggregator shall ensure a minimum amount of Rs. 5 Lakh as insurance for passenger. 9.6 The aggregator shall not prohibit or restrict the on-boarded drivers from operating with multiple aggregators. 9 Motor Vehicle Aggregator Guidelines 2025 9.7 The aggregator shall develop a mechanism in the App for both, the driver and the passenger, to rate the quality of overall experience of a journey. 9.8 The aggregator shall permit a motor vehicle with a valid contract carriage permit and willing to get on-boarded, to be on-boarded with the aggregator, subject to compliance with the relevant clauses of these guidelines. 9.9 The aggregator should not have had its license cancelled in the past one year. 9.10 A Grievance Officer shall be appointed by the aggregator who shall resolve all the grievances received and provide the details of the grievances received by it, to the Competent Authority through an online process. The details of the Grievance Officer i.e. the name, e-mail address, and telephone number(s) shall be made available by the aggregator on its App and website. 10. lnduction Training Programme 10.1 The lnduction Training Programme shall be of a duration of at least forty (40) hours for the drivers comprising a combination of in-person and virtual training sessions. The broad details of the course of this program shall be made available online by the aggregator. The course shall train the drivers: i) to use the App of the aggregator; ii) the relevant provisions of the related Acts and rules; iii) Motor Vehicles (Driving) Regulations 2017; iv) first responder training for at least six (6) hours to respond to emergencies and provide assistance in case of road accidents; v) on careful driving, traffic rules, motor vehicle maintenance, fuel efficient driving, conduct and behavior; vi) on familiarization with the routes; vii) on the terms and conditions of the agreement between the driver and the aggregator; viii) special training on gender sensitivity and Divyangjan sensitivity and mobility needs; ix) such other training as the State Government may require. 10.2 The aggregator shall upload details of the induction training structure on the designated portal. 10 Motor Vehicle Aggregator Guidelines 2025 11. Compliances with regard to drivers 11.1 For the purposes of on-boarding drivers, the aggregator shall ensure that the following conditions are complied with, namely: i) That the driver holds a valid proof of any identity on the basis of any document listed under Rule 4 of the Central Motor Vehicle Rules, 1989 (“CMVR”); ii) That the driver holds a valid driving licence for the concerned vehicle type or class within which the respective vehicle falls throughout the period of onboarding; iii) That the driver has the required experience mandated under sub- section (1) of section 7 of the Act; iv) That the driver has a valid bank account in his name; v) That the driver has not been convicted within the past three (3) years, for any of the following offence, namely: (i) the offence of driving under the influence of drugs or alcohol, and (ii) any cognizable offence under the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 and the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 (as may be applicable) including fraud, sexual offences, use of a motor vehicle to commit a cognizable offence, a crime involving property damage or theft, acts of violence, acts of terror or acts constituting nuisance or danger to public; vi) That the driver undergoes a medical examination for fitness, including an eye check-up, by a hospital or medical institution identified by the aggregator; vii) That the driver undergoes a psychological analysis conducted by the aggregator to determine whether they are fit to be on-boarded; viii) That the character and antecedents of the driver are verified by the Police at least seven (7) days prior to on-boarding and the aggregator shall maintain a written record of such verification; ix) That a valid contract is executed between the aggregator and the driver, including in the language of the State, specifying the terms and conditions applicable for on-boarding and operating vehicles. The standard terms and conditions shall be made available online by the aggregator on its website. Provided that the compliance with above conditions for the entire period shall be co-terminus with the licence held by the aggregator. 11 Motor Vehicle Aggregator Guidelines 2025 11.2 For the welfare of drivers, the aggregator shall ensure compliance with the following conditions, namely: i) Ensure a health insurance for not less than Rs. 5 Lakh for each driver on-boarded, which shall be increased each year by such percentage each driver as notified by the Central Government. ii) Ensure a term insurance for not less than Rs. 10 Lakh for each driver on-boarded, which shall be increased each year by such percentage as notified by the Central Government. iii) Provided that the provisions made under Social Security Code, 2020 will prevail upon being notified and implemented with respect to sub-clause (i) and sub-clause (ii) above. iv) Conduct annual Refresher Training Programme as a combination of in-person and virtual training sessions through either in-house resources or collaboration with other institutions and maintaining the records of such refresher training. v) Provided that the drivers whose rating falls below 5 percentile from amongst all drivers who are placed similarly in terms of the duration of engagement with the aggregator, shall compulsorily undergo Refresher Training Programme every quarter, in absence of which the driver shall not continue to provide services through the aggregator. vi) In the event a complaint is registered against the driver for violation of provisions of the Act, rules or these Guidelines, from a passenger, an inquiry is conducted by the aggregator within a period of three (3) days from the day on which such complaint is made and appropriate action against the driver is only taken after completion of such inquiry. The aggregator shall inform the passenger of outcome of the said inquiry upon its completion. 11.3 The aggregator shall maintain a digital record of the following documents pertaining to the on-boarded drivers, duly authenticated from SARATHI portal and such other documents as the aggregator may deem fit, including i) A photograph; ii) Physical copy of the Driving licence; iii) Present residential address along-with acceptable documents for proof of address as specified in CMVR; iv) Verified bank account details; 12 Motor Vehicle Aggregator Guidelines 2025 v) Names and addresses with contact information of two emergency contacts. 12. Permit The aggregator shall ensure that all the motor vehicles attached with on- boarded drivers have an appropriate permit under applicable provisions of the Act. 13. Compliances with regard to vehicles 13.1 An aggregator shall ensure that the motor vehicles attached with on- boarded drivers comply with the following conditions: i) Have a valid registration; ii) Have a valid Certificate of Fitness as per the Act; iii) Display the registration mark as specified in the CMVR; iv) Have a valid third-party insurance policy; v) Have a valid pollution-under-control certificate required under the Central Motor Vehicles Rules, 1989. vi) Such emission norms as may be specified by the State Government for the State or any urban area in the State, as the case may be; vii) City specific fuel norms; viii) Have paid the applicable motor vehicle taxes and other dues; ix) Does not have any unpaid challans related to offences and contraventions under the Act imposed on the motor vehicle; x) Display a copy of driver’s licence and the motor vehicle permit (if applicable) inside the motor vehicle (except motorcycles). The said display shall be on the back side of the front seat next to the driver in such manner as shall be clearly visible to the passengers in the motor vehicle; xi) Are fitted with a functional Vehicle Location Tracking Device or System, compliant with AIS 140, along-with a panic button, as mandated under Rule 125H of the CMVR and connected to the control room of the aggregator with the electronic feed from vehicle location tracking device available at integrated command and control centre established by the State/ UT Government; xii) Have disabled child lock mechanism (except for three-wheelers, motorcycles and buses) as per applicable law; 13 Motor Vehicle Aggregator Guidelines 2025 xiii) Have enabled manual override for the central locking system (except for three-wheeled vehicles, motor cycles, buses, as per applicable law); xiv) Have a fire extinguisher of suitable capacity placed inside the motor vehicle (except for motor cycles); xv) Have a first-aid kid placed inside the motor vehicle. 13.2 An aggregator shall not onboard vehicles which have been registered for more than a period of eight years from the date of initial registration of the vehicle and shall ensure that all vehicles onboarded by it should not have exceeded eight years since the date of initial registration of the vehicle. 13.3 An aggregator shall verify and maintain the following documents and records of all motor vehicles on-boarded by it and shall authenticate this data on a real-time basis on the VAHAN portal: i) Certificate of Registration; ii) Certificate of Fitness as per the Act; iii) Chassis and engine numbers; iv) Third-party insurance policy; v) Pollution-under-control certificate; and vi) The number of pending e-challans prior to on-boarding and their clearance before on-boarding. 14. Compliance with regard to Website, App and technology 14.1 The aggregator shall develop and maintain a website disclosing details of its ownership, registered address, fare structure, contact information for customer services, e-mail address, services offered by it and other relevant details. 14.2 The App shall be developed in a manner that it is compliant with the applicable law. 14.3 The App shall be accessible in English, Hindi, along-with the official language of the State/ UT where the official language is not Hindi. 14.4 The vulnerabilities and the cyber safety of the App of the aggregator shall be certified by a cyber security firm recognised and empaneled by CERT-In. 14.5 The data, including but not limited to, the details of journey, details of passengers and the fare, shall be generated on the App of the aggregator 14 Motor Vehicle Aggregator Guidelines 2025 and stored as per the applicable law, including the Digital Personal Data Protection Act, 2023. 14.6 The proportion of the share of the fare and incentives provided to the driver, particulars of the driver fare and apportioned fare and other information as may be notified by the State Government, shall be ensured by the aggregator through up-to-date disclosures on its website and in the App. 14.7 The App shall include a feature enabling the passengers to share their live location and status of the journey till the journey is completed whereafter the live location sharing feature shall be unavailable. 14.8 The App shall include special features which make it accessible for Divyangjans. 14.9 The App shall display a clear and high-resolution picture of the driver on- boarded on the App of the aggregator. 14.10 The aggregator shall formulate and implement a zero-tolerance policy for use of drugs or alcohol for on-boarded drivers while they are on duty. The aggregator shall upload its policy and the procedure to report a complaint in this regard on their website and on their App. The aggregator shall immediately and forthwith Off-Board the driver upon receipt of a complaint alleging violation of its zero-tolerance policy pending inquiry. The suspension shall continue during the period of investigation by the aggregator. 14.11 The contact information of the driver undertaking journey shall be available to the passenger, through the App, for at least seven (7) days from the end of the journey; 14.12 The aggregator shall establish a control room with 24x7 operations and ensure that all the motor vehicles onboarded maintain an uninterrupted contact with the control room. The control room shall monitor the movements of motor vehicles and the on-boarded drivers. 14.13 Aggregator shall establish a call centre with an active telephone number and e-mail address, displayed clearly on its website and on the App, which shall be operational 24x7, providing assistance in English and along-with the official language of the State. These call centres shall be responsible for: i) enabling the passenger and/or the driver or any other person to contact the call centre regarding issues related to the journey or the on-boarded driver etc.; ii) ensuring redressal of the passenger grievances. 15 Motor Vehicle Aggregator Guidelines 2025 14.14 The aggregator shall cooperate with lawfully authorised authorities investigating an accident or incident involving motor vehicle or driver on-boarded by the aggregator. 15. Compliances to ensure safety of passengers The aggregator shall ensure compliance with the following conditions related to safety of the passengers, namely: 15.1 that the Vehicle Location and Tracking Devices installed in motor vehicles, as applicable, functions properly and the feed is received by it as well as linked to the integrated Command and Control Centre of the State Government. Explanation: For the purposes of these guidelines, Vehicle Location Tracking Devices shall include the in-App location tracking for all motor vehicles, including motorcycles and three-wheelers. 15.2 that the driver follows the route indicated in the App. through an in-built mechanism and in case of any deviation, the App shall signal the control room, which shall then connect with the driver and the passenger immediately. 15.3 that the safety of the passengers especially children, women and divyangjan passengers and compliance with the applicable law is ensured. 15.4 that a mechanism is provided on the App to verify whether the identity of the driver undertaking a journey is same as the one registered and verified by Police during the on-boarding process. 15.5 that regular checks by personnel authorized by the aggregator of motor vehicles on-boarded are conducted. 16. Non-discrimination policy to be followed by the aggregator The aggregator shall treat the motor vehicles owned by drivers on-boarded or any third party providing motor vehicles to such on-boarded drivers, at parity with the motor vehicles owned by it. 17. Regulation of Fare 17.1 The fare notified by the State Government for the respective category or class of motor vehicles, shall be the base fare chargeable to passengers availing services from the aggregator. 17.2 The base fare chargeable shall be for a minimum of three (3) kilometers to compensate for dead mileage including the distance travelled without a 16 Motor Vehicle Aggregator Guidelines 2025 passenger and the distance travelled and fuel utilized for picking up the passenger(s). 17.3 The aggregator shall be permitted to charge a minimum of 50% lower than the base fare and a maximum dynamic pricing of two times the base fare specified under sub-clause (17.1) above. 17.4 The driver onboarded along-with the motor vehicle with the aggregator shall receive at least 80% of the fare applicable including all cost under driver’s fare and the remaining charges may be retained as the Apportioned Fare by the aggregator. The payment may be settled daily, weekly or fortnightly but not later as per the agreement between the driver and the aggregator. 17.5 With respect to motor vehicles owned by the aggregator the on-boarded driver shall receive at least 60% of the fare applicable, including all costs specified in Driver Fare and the remaining charges shall be retained as the Apportioned Fare. 17.6 With respect to any other scenario not covered under sub-clause (17.4) or (17.5) above, the driver shall receive the payment as per his agreement with the aggregator. 17.7 In States where the fare has not been determined by the State Government, the base fare may be notified to the State Government by the aggregator for the purposes of fare regulation and shall be followed till such time as the State Government determines the fare. Similarly, fixation for other classes of vehicles, permitted for aggregation in the State, shall be done by the State Government. 17.8 No passenger shall be charged for dead mileage except when the distance for availing the ride is less than three (3) kilometres as mentioned under sub-clause (17.2) above and the fare shall be charged only from the point of origin of the journey to the point of destination where the passenger is dropped off. 18. Cancellation of Rides 18.1 On cancellation of a booking by a driver after accepting a journey on the App, a penalty of 10% of the Fare not exceeding Rs. 100, shall be imposed where such cancellation is made without a reason identified as valid by the aggregator and duly and specifically mentioned on its website and App. 18.2 On cancellation of a booking by passenger after booking a journey on the App, a fee of 10% of the fare not exceeding Rs. 100, shall be collected, when such cancellation is made without a valid reason and duly and specifically mentioned on the website and App of the Aggregator. Such 17 Motor Vehicle Aggregator Guidelines 2025 fare amount shall be divided between the driver and the aggregator in the same proportion as stated under Clause 15 of these guidelines. 19. Penalty The penalty, if any, as provided under clause 18 above, imposed on the driver or the aggregator, shall be deducted from the respective share specified in under clause 17 of the driver or the aggregator. 20. Sustainable Fleet Management by aggregators The State Government may direct aggregators to incrementally on an annual basis increase the percentage of electric, alternate fuel or zero emission vehicles in their fleet. 21. Inclusion of Divyangjan Fleet The State Government shall determine an adequate number of Divyangjan friendly motor vehicles required in the State and direct aggregators to proportionately include such vehicles within their fleet. 22. Conversion to Electric Mobility The aggregator shall mandatorily adhere to the targets fixed for inclusion of electric vehicles in their fleet. The targets shall be fixed by an appropriate Government organization responsible for regulating air quality or by the State Government. 23. Aggregation of non-transport motorcycles by aggregators 23.1 The State Government may allow aggregation of non-transport motorcycles for journey by passengers as shared mobility through aggregators resulting in reduced traffic congestion and vehicular pollution, along-with providing inter alia affordable passenger mobility, hyperlocal delivery, creating livelihood opportunities. 23.2 The State Government may, in exercise of its powers under sub-section (3) of

## of the Act, impose fees on the aggregator for issuance of authorizations permitting non-transport motorcycles to undertake journeys through such aggregator, on a daily/ weekly/ fortnightly basis, as may be determined by the State Government. 23.4 On-boarding of drivers by the aggregator under this clause shall satisfy the compliances stipulated under these guidelines. 18 Motor Vehicle Aggregator Guidelines 2025 24. Suspension of aggregator Licence 24.1 The Licence granted to an aggregator may be suspended for reasons in writing (“Suspension Order”), by the Competent Authority either on its own or on receipt of a complaint against the aggregator after an inquiry conducted by the Competent Authority. 24.2 The period of suspension may extend to three (3) months. 24.3 The Suspension Order shall be passed by the Competent Authority after providing the aggregator a hearing within ten (10) days from receipt of such complaint or initiation of action. 24.4 The following grounds, amongst others, shall be considered as grounds for suspension of Licence: i) Failure of aggregator to ensure safety of the passenger and/or the driver, including through by a reasoned analysis of the quarterly rating parameters determined by the State Government; or ii) Frequent instances with regard to the fares charged to passengers, unjustified imposition of dynamic pricing, non-compliance with the guidelines for proportionate division of fare between the drivers and aggregator, imposition of unsubstantiated charges on drivers ; or iii) Failure of aggregator to comply with the obligations contained in the contract with the drivers; or iv) Failure of aggregator to comply with these guidelines; v) Jeopardizing the safety of passenger and/or well-being of drivers; vi) Violation of safety standards by the aggregator resulting in road accidents; vii) Severity of financial irregularities as obtained through audit of accounts of the aggregator; and viii) Any other parameters as the Competent Authority may deem fit and appropriate. Provided that if the Competent Authority is of the opinion that it would not be expedient or feasible to suspend the License of the aggregator, it may determine and impose upon such aggregator, a penalty which shall be up to Rupees One (1) Crore but not be less than Rupees One (1) Lakh depending upon the quantum and severity of the alleged infraction. 24.5 When a Licence is suspended, the aggregator shall immediately stop all operations under the Licence till the time such suspension is revoked or the period of suspension ends. 19 Motor Vehicle Aggregator Guidelines 2025 i) Before expiry of the period of suspension, the aggregator shall, by way of an undertaking in writing, undertake that the grounds for its suspension, specified under the Suspension Order, stand resolved. ii) The competent Authority shall thereafter pass another order acknowledging resolution of the grounds for passing of the Suspension Order and receipt of the undertaking by the aggregator. iii) Thereafter, the aggregator shall resume operations for a period that shall not be less than two (2) months but may extend to six (6) months, ("Probationary Period") during which period, the aggregator shall continue operations and ensure compliance with these guidelines and any infractions during this period that may occasion action for suspension of license may lead directly to cancellation of the license under clause (25). 25. Cancellation and Surrender of aggregator Licence 25.1 Where the aggregator, i) has had its Licence suspended within a duration of three financial years and has committed another infraction under clause 24 that may occasion action for suspension; or ii) has committed or cause to be committed a violation of these guidelines of such a grievous nature so as to endanger the safety or security of the passenger or the driver. the Competent Authority shall issue a notice to such aggregator to show cause as to why the Licence granted to them should not be cancelled. 25.2 The Competent Authority may, within ten (10) days of issuing the show cause notice under clause (25.1) above, provide an opportunity of a hearing to the aggregator and thereafter take a decision on cancelling the Licence or otherwise, through a reasoned order and bring such cancellation to the notice of other States and the Central Government. 25.3 Where a licence is cancelled, the aggregator shall immediately stop all operations under the Licence. 25.4 Without prejudice to the order of cancellation passed by the Competent Authority, the Security Deposit shall stand forfeited. 25.5 The aggregator may, at any time, voluntarily surrender the Licence and on such surrender, the Security Deposit shall be returned to the aggregator after deductions on account of outstanding dues, if any. 20 Motor Vehicle Aggregator Guidelines 2025 26. Appeal 26.1 The aggregator aggrieved by any order of suspension or cancellation passed by the Competent Authority may, within thirty (30) days of receipt of such order, appeal to the notified appellate authority designated by the State Government for hearing appeal against the impugned order. 26.2 An appeal shall be in the form of a memorandum, disclosing the grounds for appeal and shall be accompanied by the requisite fee for appeal determined by the State Government and the copy of the order passed by the Competent Authority. 26.3 The appellate authority shall provide an opportunity of hearing to the aggregator and decide the appeal within a period of 60 days from the date of filing the appeal. 26.4 While deciding the appeal, appellate authority shall pass such orders as he deems fit. 27. Powers of the State Government 27.1 The State Government shall be empowered to call for such information documents or records from the aggregator, as it deems fit to ensure compliance by the aggregator with these guidelines, through a written notice. The information sought shall also include the power to conduct an inquiry into the aggregator. 27.2 The State Government shall enable the aggregator to authenticate the details of on-boarded vehicles, drivers and vehicle owners through the VAHAN and SARTHI portals. 21 Motor Vehicle Aggregator Guidelines 2025 FORM I [See Clause 4.1] Application for the Grant of Licence for Aggregator under the Motor Vehicles Aggregator Guidelines, 2025 To, The [Designation], [Name of State] Competent Authority, [Name of State] I, the undersigned hereby apply for grant of a Licence for operation as an Aggregator under the Motor Vehicles Aggregator Guidelines, 2025 in the State of [Name of State]. 1. Full name 2. Address of the head office 3. Number of branch offices and addresses thereof, if any 4. a. If a registered company, enclose a copy of certificate of incorporation/ registration along with a copy of memorandum of association. b. If a firm, enclose a copy of certificate of registration of the firm. 5. Name and contact details of key managerial personnel or authorized signatory 1. 2. 3. 6. Telephone number, website address and E-mail address 7. Number of (type of vehicle) proposed to be operated. (Enclose a separate list containing vehicle numbers and permit particulars of each vehicle, as applicable) Details of GPS/ GPRS facility 9. Details of other infrastructure 10. Details of location of servers where data is proposed to be stored 11. Details of returns filed in the last three financial years. (Enclose copies of financial statements of last three years) 12. Details of application fee paid Rs. 13. Details of Security Deposit 22 Motor Vehicle Aggregator Guidelines 2025 I hereby declare that the information given above and other documents enclosed herewith are true to the best of my knowledge. I understand that if any information is found to be incorrect at any point of time, the Licence granted to me is liable to be cancelled, besides initiating other legal action/actions against me. I have gone through the provisions of the Motor Vehicles Aggregator Guidelines, 2025, I accept and agree to abide by the same and the reference statues and rules mentioned herein. Place: Date: Signature of the Applicant/ Authorized Signatory (along with company seal, as applicable) 23 Motor Vehicle Aggregator Guidelines 2025 FORM II [See Clause 7.2] Application for the Renewal of Licence for Aggregator under the Motor Vehicles Aggregator Guidelines, 2025 To, The [Designation], [Name of State] Competent Authority, [Name of State] I, the undersigned hereby apply for grant of a Licence for operation as an Aggregator under the Motor Vehicles Aggregator Guidelines, 2025 in the State of [Name of State]. 1. Full name 2. Address of the main office 3. Number of branch offices and addresses thereof, if any 4. a. If a registered company, enclose a copy b. of certificate of incorporation / registration along with a copy of memorandum of association. c. If a firm, enclose a copy of certificate of registration of the firm. 5. Name and contact details of key managerial personnel or authorized signatory 1. 2. 3. Telephone number, website address and email address 7. Number of (type of vehicle) proposed to be operated. (Enclose a separate list containing vehicle numbers and permit particulars of each vehicle) Details of GPS/ GPRS facility 9. Details of other infrastructure 10. Details of location of servers where data is proposed to be stored 11. Details of returns filed in the last three years. (Enclose copies of financial statements of last three years) 12. Details of Licence: a. Licence Number b. No. of suspensions, if any, and details thereof 13. Details of fee paid Rs. 14. Details of Security Deposit 24 Motor Vehicle Aggregator Guidelines 2025 I hereby declare that the information given above and other documents enclosed herewith are true to the best of my knowledge. I understand that if any information is found to be incorrect at any point of time, the Licence granted to me is liable to be cancelled, besides initiating other legal action/actions against me. I have gone through the provisions of the Motor Vehicles Aggregator Guidelines, 2025, I accept and agree to abide by the same and the reference statues and rules mentioned herein. Place: Date: Signature of the Applicants Authorized Signatory (along with company seat, as applicable 25 Motor Vehicle Aggregator Guidelines 2025 FORM III [See Clause 4.7] Licence for an Aggregator under the Motor Vehicles Aggregator Guidelines, 2025 [_________] is hereby licenced to operate as an Aggregator under the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 in compliance with directions stipulated under the Motor Vehicles Aggregator Guidelines, 2025. 1. Full name of the Aggregator 2. Address of the main office 3. Number of branch offices and addresses thereof, if any 4. Telephone number, website address and email address 5. Number of auto rickshaw/ e- rickshaw/ motor cab/ motor Cycle or bus (as per the list enclosed by the Aggregator in Form I/II, as may be applicable) 6. Particulars ofthe manner in which the Aggregator shall function 7. Details of application fee paid 8. Details of Security Deposit The Licencee shall observe all the conditions contained in the Motor Vehicles Aggregator Guidelines, 2025. Place: Date: Signature of the Competent Authority मोटर यान मोटर यान एĒीगेटर ǑदशाǓनदȶश 2025 1 मोटर यान एĒीगेटर ǑदशाǓनदȶश 2025 सामĒी कȧ ताͧलका Ĥèतावना .................................................................................................. 3 यह ǐरपोट[ ͩकसके ͧलए Ĥासंͬगक हो सकती है .............................................................. 4 मोटर यान एĒीगेटर ǑदशाǓनदȶश 2025 ..................................................................... 5 1. पǐरभाषाएं ......................................................................................... 5 2. ǑदशाǓनदȶशɉ कȧ ĤयोÏयता ........................................................................... 7 3. कɅ ġ सरकार ɮवारा नाम ǓनǑद[ç ट पोट[ल ................................................................ 8 4. लाइसɅस Ĥदान करने या उनके नवीनीकरण के ͧलए आवेदन और उससे संबंͬधत मामले ..................... 8 5. लाइसɅस शुãक...................................................................................... 9 6. ĤǓतभूǓत जमा राͧश ............................................................................... 9 7. लाइसɅस कȧ वैधता, उसका नवीनीकरण और उससे संबंͬधत मामले.................................. 9 8. लाइसɅस ĤाÜत करने कȧ पाğता ...................................................................10 9. लाइसɅस Ĥदान करने कȧ शतɏ .....................................................................10 10. Ĥेरण Ĥͧश¢ण काय[Đम ...........................................................................11 11. Ĝाइवरɉ के संबंध मɅ अनुपालन ....................................................................12 12. परͧमट ...........................................................................................15 13. यानɉ के संबंध मɅ अनुपालन ......................................................................15 14. वेबसाइट, ऐप और Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧ के संबंध मɅ अनुपालन .............................................17 15. याǒğयɉ कȧ सुर¢ा सुǓनिæचत करने के ͧलए अनुपालन .............................................19 16. एĒीगेटर ɮवारा अपनाई जाने वालȣ गैर-भेदभाव नीǓत ..................................................19 17. ͩकराये का ͪवǓनयमन .............................................................................20 18. याğा Ǔनरèत करना ................................................................................21 19. जुमा[ना ...........................................................................................21 20. एĒीगेटस[ ɮवारा सतत Ýलȣट Ĥबंधन ..............................................................21 21. Ǒदåयांगजन अनुकूल बेड़े को शाͧमल करना ........................................................21 22. इलेिÈĚक मोǒबͧलटȣ मɅ पǐरवत[न ..................................................................22 23. एĒीगेटस[ ɮवारा गैर-पǐरवहन मोटरसाइͩकलɉ का एकğीकरण (एĒीगेशन) ...........................22 2 मोटर यान एĒीगेटर ǑदशाǓनदȶश 2025 24. एĒीगेटर कȧ लाईसɅस का Ǔनलंबन ...................................................................22 25. एĒीगेटर लाईसɅस को Ǔनरèत करना और उसे वापस करना .............................................24 26. अपील ............................................................................................25 27. राÏय सरकार कȧ शिÈतयां ..........................................................................26 Ĥपğ I ..................................................................................................27 Ĥपğ II ..................................................................................................29 Ĥपğ III ..................................................................................................31 3 मोटर यान एĒीगेटर ǑदशाǓनदȶश 2025 Ĥèतावना 2020 मɅ, सड़क पǐरवहन और राजमाग[ मंğालय ने मोटर यान अͬधǓनयम, 1988 कȧ धारा 93 के अंतग[त “मोटर यान एĒीगेटर ǑदशाǓनदȶश 2020” जारȣ ͩकए थे। उÈत ǑदशाǓनदȶशɉ मɅ राÏय सरकारɉ को सड़क पǐरवहन ¢ेğ मɅ लाइसɅस जारȣ करने और एĒीगेटरɉ को ͪवǓनयͧमत करने के ͧलए एक Ǔनयामक ढांचा Ĥदान ͩकया गया। 2020 से भारत के साझा गǓतशीलता पǐरतंğ (शेयड[ मोǒबͧलटȣ इकोͧसè टम) मɅ तेजी से और मह×वपूण[ बदलाव हुए हɇ। बाइक-शेयǐरंग, इलेिÈĚक वाहनɉ (ईवी) कȧ शुǾआत और ऑटो-ǐरÈशा कȧ सवारȣ सǑहत ͪवͪवध और सुनà य मोǒबͧलटȣ समाधानɉ कȧ मांग मɅ वृɮͬध से उपभोÈता आधार åयापक हो गया है। जैसे-जैसे याğा संबंधी Ĥाथͧमकताएं ͪवकͧसत हो रहȣ हɇ, एĒीगेटस[ ने नवीन मॉडलɉ के माÚयम से इन नई मांगɉ को पूरा करने के ͧलए अपनी सेवाओं का ͪवèतार ͩकया है। मोटर यान एĒीगेटर ǑदशाǓनदȶश 2020 को मोटर यान एĒीगेटर पǐरतंğ मɅ ͪवकास के साथ Ǔनयामक ढांचे को अɮयतन रखने के ͧलए संशोͬधत ͩकया गया है। नए ǑदशाǓनदȶशɉ मɅ ĤयोÈ ता कȧ सुर¢ा और चालक (Ĝाइवर) के कãयाण के मुɮदɉ पर Úयान देते हुए कम से कम हè त¢ेप वालȣ Ǔनयामक Ĥणालȣ Ĥदान करने का Ĥयास ͩकया गया है। राÏय सरकारɅ इन संशोͬधत ǑदशाǓनदȶशɉ को उनके जारȣ होने कȧ तारȣख से तीन (3) माह के भीतर अपना सकती हɇ और इसमɅ ǓनǑद[çट Ĥावधानɉ के अǓतǐरÈत अÛय Ĥावधान भी शाͧमल कर सकती हɇ। 4 मोटर यान एĒीगेटर ǑदशाǓनदȶश 2025 यह ǐरपोट[ ͩकसके ͧलए Ĥासंͬगक हो सकती है Motor Vehicle Aggregators State Transport Departments Drivers Onboarded by Aggregators Commuters मोटर वाहन एĒीगेटस[ राÏय पǐरवहन ͪवभागɉ याğी याğी एĒीगेटस[ ɮवारा भतȸ ͩकए गए Ĝाइवर 5 मोटर यान एĒीगेटर ǑदशाǓनदȶश 2025 मोटर यान एĒीगेटर ǑदशाǓनदȶश 2025 1. पǐरभाषाएं 1.1. इन ǑदशाǓनदȶशɉ मɅ, जब तक ͩक संदभ[ से अÛयथा अपेͯ¢त न हो,- (क) “अͬधǓनयम” मोटर यान अͬधǓनयम, 1988 से अͧभĤेत है। (ख) "एĒीगेटर" का ता×पय[ अͬधǓनयम कȧ धारा 2 कȧ उप-धारा (1क) के अंतग[त Ǒदया गया है। (ग) "ऐप" ͩकसी एĒीगेटर ɮवारा ͪवकͧसत एवं अनुरͯ¢त ͫडिजटल एÜलȣकेशन से अͧभĤेत है। (घ) "आवेदन शुãक" इन ǑदशाǓनदȶशɉ के खंड 4 के अंतग[त आवेदन के संबंध मɅ Ĥभार से अͧभĤेत है। (ङ) "ͪवभािजत ͩकराया" ͩकराये के उस भाग से अͧभĤेत है, जो एĒीगेटर ɮवारा तय ͩकया जाता है। (च) "स¢म Ĥाͬधकारȣ" राÏय सरकार के ऐसे Ĥाͬधकारȣ से अͧभĤेत है, जो अͬधǓनयम कȧ धारा 93 के अंतग[त अनु£िÜत (लाइसɅस) जारȣ करता है। (छ) "अनुबंध" एĒीगेटर और Ĝाइवर के बीच समझौते से अͧभĤेत है, िजसमɅ ऐसे एĒीगेटर के ऐप के माÚयम से याğी को सेवाएं Ĥदान करने के ͧलए दोनɉ प¢ɉ के अͬधकारɉ और दाǓय×वɉ को ǓनǑद[çट ͩकया जाता है। (ज) "नाम ǓनǑद[ç ट पोट[ल" इन ǑदशाǓनदȶशɉ के खंड 3 के अंतग[त èथाͪपत और अͬधसूͬचत पोट[ल से अͧभĤेत है। (झ) "Ĝाइवर ͩकराया" का ता× पय[ याğा के दौरान ऐप के माÚयम से याğी को Ĥदान कȧ गई सेवाओं के ͧलए एĒीगेटर ɮवारा Ĝाइवर को देय ͩकराए का ऐसा Ǒहèसा, िजसमɅ Ĝाइवर ɮवारा भुगतान ͩकया गया टोल और पाͩकɍ ग शुãक शाͧमल है। 6 मोटर यान एĒीगेटर ǑदशाǓनदȶश 2025 (ञ) "डायनेͧमक मूãय Ǔनधा[रण" का ता× पय[ एĒीगेटर के ͩकराए के ͩकराया एãगोǐरदम का आउटपुट है, जो याğा कȧ कȧमत तब बढ़ा देता है जब याğाओं कȧ मांग आपूǓत[ से अͬधक हो जाती है। (ट) "ͩकराया" का ता× पय[ ͩकसी याğा के ͧलए ऐप के माÚयम से एĒीगेटर Üलेटफॉम[ पर पǐरवहन सेवाओं का लाभ उठाने के ͧलए याğी ɮवारा Ĝाइवर या एĒीगेटर, जैसा भी मामला हो, को देय कुल शुãक होगा, िजसमɅ टोल कȧ लागत, कर और पाͩकɍ ग शुãक, जो भी लागू हो, शाͧमल हɇ। (ठ) "Ĥपğ" इन ǑदशाǓनदȶशɉ के साथ संलÊन Ĥपğ से अͧभĤेत है। (ड) "ͧशकायत Ǔनवारण अͬधकारȣ" ͩकसी याğी या चालक कȧ ͧशकायत के Ǔनवारण के ͧलए एĒीगेटर ɮवारा ǓनयुÈत åयिÈत से अͧभĤेत है। (ढ) "Ĥेरण Ĥͧश¢ण काय[Đम" इन ǑदशाǓनदȶशɉ के खंड (10) मɅ ǓनǑद[çट Ĥेरण Ĥͧश¢ण काय[Đम से अͧभĤेत है। (ण) "याğा" से Ĥèथान के èथान से गंतåय तक ǓनǑद[çट तारȣख और समय पर कȧ गई याğा से अͧभĤेत है, ͩफर चाहे वह याğा कȧ गई हो या नहȣं और इसमɅ याğा योजना के ͧलए उपयोग ͩकए जा रहे मोटर यान का Ĥकार या Įेणी शाͧमल होगी। (त) "लाइसɅस" अͬधǓनयम कȧ धारा 93 के अंतग[त एĒीगेटर को जारȣ ͩकया गया लाइसɅस से अͧभĤेत है। (थ) "लाइसɅस शुãक" इन ǑदशाǓनदȶशɉ के खंड 5 के अंतग[त देय शुãक से अͧभĤेत है। (द) "ऑन-बोड[" से इसके åयाकरͨणक Ǿपांतरɉ सǑहत एĒीगेटर ɮवारा ͫडिजटल Üलेटफॉम[ पर Ĝाइवरɉ और वाहनɉ को पंजीकृत करने कȧ ĤͩĐया से अͧभĤेत है। (ध) "ऑफ-बोड[" इसके åयाकरͨणक Ǿपांतरɉ सǑहत एĒीगेटर ɮवारा ͫडिजटल Üलेटफॉम[ पर Ĝाइवर और वाहन का पंजीकरण Ǔनरèत करने कȧ ĤͩĐया से अͧभĤेत है। 7 मोटर यान एĒीगेटर ǑदशाǓनदȶश 2025 (न) "याğी" ऐसे åयिÈत से अͧभĤेत है जो याğा करने के ͧलए एĒीगेटर के ऐप का उपयोग करता है। (ऩ) "रेǑटंग" एĒीगेटर ɮवारा ǓनǑद[çट मापदंडɉ के आधार पर याğी ɮवारा कȧ गई याğा कȧ गुणवƣा के मूãयांकन से अͧभĤेत है। (प) "पुनæचया[ Ĥͧश¢ण काय[Đम और मूãयांकन" एĒीगेटर के साथ एकȧकृत Ĝाइवरɉ के ͧलए åयिÈतगत Ǿप से और आभासी Ĥͧश¢ण सğɉ मɅ Ǒदया गया कम से कम अड़तालȣस (48) घंटे कȧ अवͬध का Ĥͧश¢ण सğ और 10 घंटे कȧ अवͬध के एक Ǔनरंतर सğ से अͧभĤेत है। (फ) "ĤǓतभूǓत जमा" उस राͧश से अͧभĤेत है, जो एĒीगेटर ɮवारा देय है, िजसे लाइसɅस शुãक के साथ बɇक गारंटȣ या बीमा जमानत बांड के Ǿप मɅ Ĥèतुत ͩकया जाना है। 1.2. इन ǑदशाǓनदȶशɉ के अंतग[त पǐरभाͪषत और उिãलͨखत शÞदɉ और अͧभåयिÈतयɉ का वहȣ ता× पय[ होगा जो अͬधǓनयम मɅ Ǒदया गया है। 2. ǑदशाǓनदȶशɉ कȧ ĤयोÏयता 2.1. ये ǑदशाǓनदȶश ͩकसी भी राÏय के भीतर संचाͧलत ͩकसी भी एĒीगेटर पर लागू हɉगे। 2.2. ये ǑदशाǓनदȶश उन संèथाओं पर लागू नहȣं हɉगे जो èवयं को स¢म Ĥाͬधकारȣ ɮवारा लाइसɅस ĤाÜत एĒीगेटस[ के ͧलए एक अंतर-संचालनीय नेटवक[ के Ĥावधान तक सीͧमत रखते हɇ और Ĝाइवरɉ या मोटर वाहनɉ या दोनɉ को सीधे तौर पर शाͧमल नहȣं करते हɇ। 2.3. ये ǑदशाǓनदȶश उन संèथाओं पर लागू नहȣं हɉगे जो साव[जǓनक सेवा वाहनɉ ɮवारा याğा करने कȧ Ǒटकटɉ कȧ ǒबĐȧ का काय[ करती हɇ। 8 मोटर यान एĒीगेटर ǑदशाǓनदȶश 2025 3. कɅ ġ सरकार ɮवारा नाम ǓनǑद[ç ट पोट[ल कɅ ġ सरकार लाइसɅस के ͧलए आवेदन कȧ एकल ͨखड़कȧ अनुमोदन के ͧलए एक पोट[ल ͪवकͧसत और नाͧमत करेगी, िजसमɅ उͬचत आवेदन शुãक, लाइसɅस शुãक और ĤǓतभूǓत जमा कȧ ĤािÜत शाͧमल होगी: बशतȶ ͩक जब तक यह पोट[ल ͪवकͧसत और चालू नहȣं हो जाता, तब तक राÏय सरकारɅ मौजूदा ǑदशाǓनदȶशɉ के अनुसार लाइसɅस के ͧलए आवेदनɉ पर कार[वाई करɅगी। 4. लाइसɅस Ĥदान करने या उनके नवीनीकरण के ͧलए आवेदन और उससे संबंͬधत मामले 4.1. लाइसɅस Ĥदान करने के ͧलए आवेदन, नीचे खंड 8 के अंतग[त उिãलͨखत मानदंडɉ के अंतग[त पाğ ͩकसी भी åयिÈत ɮवारा उपरोÈत खंड 3 के अंतग[त ǓनǑद[çट पोट[ल पर, Ĥपğ 1 मɅ ͩकया जाएगा। इस आवेदन के साथ आवेदन शुãक के ऑनलाइन भुगतान का Ĥमाण संलÊन करना होगा, जैसा ͩक राÏय सरकार ɮवारा अͬधसूचना के माÚयम से Ǔनधा[ǐरत ͩकया जाएगा। 4.2. एĒीगेटर ɮवारा उसके ɮवारा संचाͧलत सभी या ͩकसी भी Ĥकार या वग[ के मोटर वाहनɉ के ͧलए एक हȣ आवेदन ͩकया जाएगा। 4.3. राÏय के सàपूण[ Ĥादेͧशक ¢ेğाͬधकार मɅ लाइसɅस जारȣ करने के ͧलए स¢म Ĥाͬधकारȣ ɮवारा एक लाइसɅस Ĥदान ͩकया जाएगा। 4.4. उप-खÖड (4.1) के अंतग[त ͩकए गए आवेदन पर स¢म Ĥाͬधकारȣ ɮवारा Ĥपğ-1 मɅ ऐसे आवेदन कȧ तारȣख से नÞबे (90) Ǒदन कȧ अवͬध के भीतर Ǔनण[य ͧलया जाएगा। 4.5. यǑद आवेदक इन Ǒदशा-Ǔनदȶशɉ के अंतग[त ǓनǑद[çट लाइसɅस Ĥदान करने कȧ ͩकसी भी शत[ का अनुपालन नहȣं करता है, जैसा ͩक स¢म Ĥाͬधकारȣ ɮवारा Ǔनधा[ǐरत ͩकया जा सकता है, तो वह एĒीगेटर का प¢ सुनने के बाद ͧलͨखत Ǿप मɅ दज[ ͩकए जाने वाले कारणɉ के साथ ऐसे आवेदन को अèवीकार कर सकता है। 4.6. इस बात से संतुçट होने पर ͩक आवेदक ने इन ǑदशाǓनदȶशɉ के अंतग[त लाइसɅस Ĥदान करने के ͧलए ǓनǑद[çट सभी शतɟ का अनुपालन ͩकया है, स¢म Ĥाͬधकारȣ आवेदक को तीस (30) Ǒदनɉ कȧ अवͬध के भीतर उͬचत लाइसɅस शुãक का भुगतान और ĤǓतभूǓत जमा करने का Ǔनदȶश देगा। 9 मोटर यान एĒीगेटर ǑदशाǓनदȶश 2025 4.7. लाइसɅस शुãक के भुगतान और ĤǓतभूǓत जमा होने पर, स¢म Ĥाͬधकारȣ भुगतान कȧ तारȣख से पंġह (15) Ǒदनɉ कȧ अवͬध के भीतर, इन ǑदशाǓनदȶशɉ के साथ संलÊन Ĥपğ III मɅ आवेदक को लाइसɅस Ĥदान करेगा। 4.8. इन ǑदशाǓनदȶशɉ के अंतग[त स¢म Ĥाͬधकारȣ ɮवारा जारȣ लाइसɅस को स¢म Ĥाͬधकारȣ ɮवारा नाम ǓनǑद[çट पोट[ल पर अपलोड और अɮयतन ͩकया जाएगा। 5. लाइसɅस शुãक एĒीगेटर ɮवारा देय लाइसɅस शुãक Ǔनàनानुसार होगा: Đ.सं. ͪववरण धनराͧश ǽपए मɅ 1 एĒीगेटर को लाइसɅस Ĥदान करना 5,00,000 2 लाइसɅस का नवीनीकरण 25,000 3 लाइसɅसधारȣ के पते मɅ पǐरवत[न को नोट करने के ͧलए 25,000 6. ĤǓतभूǓत जमा राͧश एĒीगेटर ɮवारा Ĥदान कȧ जाने वालȣ ĤǓतभूǓत जमा राͧश Ǔनàनानुसार होगी: Đ.सं. ͪववरण धनराͧश ǽपए मɅ 1 100 बसɅ या 1000 अÛय मोटर यान तक 10,00,000 2 1000 बसɅ या 10000 अÛय मोटर यान तक 25,00,000 3 1000 से अͬधक बसɅ या 10000 अÛय मोटर यान 50,00,000 7. लाइसɅस कȧ वैधता, उसका नवीनीकरण और उससे संबंͬधत मामले 7.1. कोई भी लाइसɅस इसके जारȣ होने कȧ तारȣख से पांच (5) वष[ कȧ अवͬध के ͧलए वैध होगा। 7.2. इन ǑदशाǓनदȶशɉ के साथ संलÊन Ĥपğ II मɅ आवेदन के अनुसार, नवीनीकरण कȧ शतɟ के अनुपालन के अÚ यधीन, स¢म Ĥाͬधकारȣ ɮवारा पांच (05) वष[ कȧ अवͬध के ͧलए लाइसɅस का नवीनीकरण ͩकया जा सकता है। ऐसे नवीनीकरण के Ĥयोजनाथ[, स¢म Ĥाͬधकारȣ Ǔनàनͧलͨखत कȧ जांच करेगा: (क) इन ǑदशाǓनदȶशɉ के अनुपालन के संबंध मɅ एĒीगेटर का ǐरकॉड[, और 10 मोटर यान एĒीगेटर ǑदशाǓनदȶश 2025 (ख) िजस राÏय मɅ आवेदन ͩकया गया है, वहां एĒीगेटर के ͪवǽɮध कȧ गई दंडा×मक कार[वाई। 8. लाइसɅस ĤाÜत करने कȧ पाğता 8.1. आवेदक, कंपनी अͬधǓनयम, 2013 के तहत पंजीकृत कंपनी या सीͧमत देयता भागीदारȣ अͬधǓनयम, 2008 के तहत सीͧमत देयता भागीदारȣ या Ĝाइवरɉ या मोटर वाहन माͧलकɉ के संघ ɮवारा गǑठत सहकारȣ सͧमǓत होगी और सहकारȣ सͧमǓत अͬधǓनयम, 1912 के अंतग[त पंजीकृत कंपनी होगी। 8.2. आवेदक को लागू कानून का अनुपालन करना होगा, िजसमɅ अͬधǓनयम या अͬधǓनयम के अंतग[त बनाए गए Ǔनयम और ͪवǓनयम, ͫडिजटल åयिÈतगत डेटा संर¢ण अͬधǓनयम, 2023, उपभोÈता संर¢ण अͬधǓनयम, 2019 और सूचना Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧ अͬधǓनयम, 2000 और इसके आंतग[त जारȣ मÚयèथ ǑदशाǓनदȶश शाͧमल हɇ, लेͩकन इÛहȣं तक सीͧमत नहȣं हɇ। 9. लाइसɅस Ĥदान करने कȧ शतɏ लाइसɅस ĤाÜत करने के ͧलए आवेदन Ĥèतुत करने वाले एĒीगेटर को Ǔनàनͧलͨखत का अनुपालन सुǓनिæचत करना होगा: 9.1. एĒीगेटर ͩकसी Ĝाइवर को ǓनयुÈत करने से पहले तथा इन Ǒदशा-Ǔनदȶशɉ के जारȣ होने से पहले ǓनयुÈत ͩकए गए Ĝाइवरɉ के ͧलए भी खंड 10 के अंतग[त ͪवèतृत Ǿप से बताए गए अनुसार एक पǐरचया×मक Ĥͧश¢ण काय[Đम आयोिजत करेगा या करवाएगा। 9.2. एĒीगेटर को स¢म Ĥाͬधकारȣ को सेवाओं के Ĥारंभ कȧ ͧलͨखत सूचना देनी होगी और लाइसɅस Ĥदान ͩकए जाने कȧ तारȣख से छह (6) महȣने कȧ अवͬध के भीतर इसे अɮयतन करना होगा, अÛयथा स¢म Ĥाͬधकारȣ ɮवारा लाइसɅस Ǔनरè त ͩकया जा सकता है। 9.3. सेवाएं Ĥारंभ होने से बहƣर (72) घंटे पहले, एĒीगेटर स¢म Ĥाͬधकारȣ को सूͬचत करेगा और उÈत सूचना स¢म Ĥाͬधकारȣ ɮवारा ǓनǑद[çट पोट[ल पर अपलोड कȧ जाएगी। 11 मोटर यान एĒीगेटर ǑदशाǓनदȶश 2025 9.4. èवाèØय या जन सुर¢ा के संबंध मɅ कɅ ġ सरकार या संबंͬधत राÏय सरकार ɮवारा जारȣ ǑदशाǓनदȶशɉ, यǑद कोई हɉ, का एĒीगेटर और ऑन-बोड[ Ĝाइवरɉ ɮवारा अनुपालन ͩकया जाएगा। 9.5. एĒीगेटर को याǒğयɉ के ͧलए Ûयूनतम 5 लाख ǽपये कȧ बीमा राͧश सुǓनिæचत करनी होगी। 9.6. एĒीगेटर ऑन-बोडȶड Ĝाइवरɉ को कई एĒीगेटरɉ के साथ संचालन करने से रोकेगा नहȣं या ĤǓतबंͬधत नहȣं करेगा। 9.7. एĒीगेटर को ऐप मɅ Ĝाइवर और याğी दोनɉ के ͧलए एक काय[तंğ ͪवकͧसत करना होगा, िजससे याğा के समĒ अनुभव कȧ गुणवƣा का मूãयांकन ͩकया जा सके। 9.8. एĒीगेटर, वैध अनुबंध कैǐरज परͧमट वाले और ऑन-बोड[ होने के इÍछुक मोटर यान को एĒीगेटर के साथ ऑन-बोड[ होने कȧ अनुमǓत देगा, बशतȶ ͩक इन ǑदशाǓनदȶशɉ के Ĥासंͬगक खंडɉ का अनुपालन ͩकया जाए। 9.9. ͪवगत एक वष[ मɅ एĒीगेटर का लाइसɅस Ǔनरè त नहȣं हुआ होना चाǑहए। 9.10. एक ͧशकायत Ǔनवारण अͬधकारȣ ǓनयुÈत ͩकया जाएगा, जो ĤाÜत सभी ͧशकायतɉ का समाधान करेगा और ĤाÜत ͧशकायतɉ का ͪववरण ऑनलाइन ĤͩĐया के माÚयम से स¢म Ĥाͬधकारȣ को उपलÞध कराएगा। ͧशकायत Ǔनवारण अͬधकारȣ का ͪववरण अथा[त् नाम, ई-मेल पता और टेलȣफोन नंबर एĒीगेटर ɮवारा अपने ऐप और वेबसाइट पर उपलÞध कराया जाएगा। 10. Ĥेरण Ĥͧश¢ण काय[Đम 10.1. Ĝाइवरɉ के ͧलए यह Ĥͧश¢ण काय[Đम कम से कम चालȣस (40) घंटे कȧ अवͬध का होगा, िजसमɅ åयिÈतगत और वचु[अल Ĥͧश¢ण सğɉ का संयोजन शाͧमल होगा। इस काय[Đम के पाɫयĐम का ͪवèतृत ͪववरण एĒीगेटर ɮवारा ऑनलाइन उपलÞध कराया जाएगा। इस पाɫयĐम मɅ Ĝाइवरɉ को Ǔनà नͧलͨखत Ĥͧश¢ण Ǒदया जाएगा: (क) एĒीगेटर के ऐप का उपयोग करना; (ख) संबंͬधत अͬधǓनयमɉ और Ǔनयमɉ के Ĥासंͬगक Ĥावधान; (ग) मोटर यान (चालन) ͪवǓनयम 2017; 12 मोटर यान एĒीगेटर ǑदशाǓनदȶश 2025 (घ) सड़क दुघ[टनाओं के मामले मɅ आपात िèथǓत मɅ कार[वाई करने और सहायता Ĥदान करने के ͧलए कम से कम छह (6) घंटे का Ĥथम ĤǓतͩĐयाकता[ (रȣè पांडर) Ĥͧश¢ण; (ङ) सावधानीपूव[क Ĝाइͪवंग, यातायात Ǔनयम, मोटर यान का रखरखाव, Ƀधन कुशल Ĝाइͪवंग, आचरण और åयवहार पर; (च) मागɟ से पǐरͬचत होने पर; (छ) Ĝाइवर और एĒीगेटर के बीच सहमǓत कȧ शतɟ पर; (ज) लɇͬगक संवेदनशीलता और Ǒदåयांगजन के ĤǓत संवेदनशीलता और गǓतशीलता आवæयकताओं पर ͪवशेष Ĥͧश¢ण; (झ) ऐसा अÛय Ĥͧश¢ण िजसकȧ राÏय सरकार अपे¢ा करे। 10.2. एĒीगेटर को ǓनǑद[çट पोट[ल पर Ĥेरण Ĥͧश¢ण संरचना का ͪववरण अपलोड करना होगा। 11. Ĝाइवरɉ के संबंध मɅ अनुपालन 11.1. Ĝाइवरɉ को शाͧमल करने के Ĥयोजनाथ[, एĒीगेटर को यह सुǓनिæचत करेगा ͩक Ǔनàनͧलͨखत शतɟ का अनुपालन ͩकया जाए, अथा[त्: (क) ͩक चालक के पास कɅ ġȣय मोटर यान Ǔनयमावलȣ, 1989 (सीएमवीआर) के Ǔनयम 4 के अंतग[त सूचीबɮध ͩकसी भी दèतावेज़ के आधार पर ͩकसी भी पहचान का वैध Ĥमाण हो; (ख) ͩक चालक के पास संबंͬधत यान के Ĥकार या Įेणी के ͧलए वैध Ĝाइͪवंग लाइसɅस हो, िजसके अंतग[त संबंͬधत वाहन ऑनबोͫडɍग अवͬध के दौरान आता हो; (ग) ͩक चालक के पास अͬधǓनयम कȧ धारा 7 कȧ उप-धारा (1) के अंतग[त अपेͯ¢त अनुभव हो; (घ) Ĝाइवर के नाम पर वैध बɇक खाता हो; 13 मोटर यान एĒीगेटर ǑदशाǓनदȶश 2025 (ङ) ͪवगत तीन (3) वषɟ के भीतर चालक को Ǔनàनͧलͨखत मɅ से ͩकसी भी अपराध के ͧलए दोषी नहȣं ठहराया गया है, अथा[त्: (i) मादक पदाथɟ या शराब के नशे मɅ वाहन चलाने का अपराध, और (ii) भारतीय नागǐरक सुर¢ा संǑहता, 2023 और भारतीय Ûयाय संǑहता, 2023 (जैसा लागू हो) के तहत कोई भी सं£ेय अपराध,िजसमɅ धोखाधड़ी, यौन अपराध, सं£ेय अपराध करने के ͧलए मोटर वाहन का उपयोग, संपͪƣ को नुकसान पहुंचाने या चोरȣ करने वाला अपराध, Ǒहंसा के कृ×य, आतंक के कृ×य या उपġव या जनता के ͧलए खतरा पैदा करने वाले कृ×य शाͧमल हɇ; (च) ͩक चालक एĒीगेटर ɮवारा पहचाने गए अèपताल या ͬचͩक×सा संèथान ɮवारा नेğ जांच सǑहत ͩफटनेस के ͧलए ͬचͩक×सा परȣ¢ण करवाना; (छ) ͩक एĒीगेटर ɮवारा Ĝाइवर का मनोवै£ाǓनक ͪवæलेषण ͩकया जाना, ताͩक यह Ǔनधा[ǐरत ͩकया जा सके ͩक वह ऑन बोड[ के ͧलए ͩफट है या नहȣं; (ज) ͩक ऑन-बोͫडɍग से कम से कम सात (7) Ǒदन पहले Ĝाइवर के चǐरğ और उसके पहले के जीवन को पुͧलस ɮवारा स×याͪपत ͩकया जाना और एĒीगेटर ऐसे स×यापन का ͧलͨखत ǐरकॉड[ रखेगा; (झ) ͩक एĒीगेटर और Ĝाइवर के बीच एक वैध अनुबंध ǓनçपाǑदत करना, िजसमɅ राÏय कȧ भाषा मɅ ऑन बोͫडɍग और यान चलाने के ͧलए लागू Ǔनयम और शतɏ ǓनǑद[çट हɉ। एĒीगेटर ɮवारा मानक Ǔनयम और शतɏ अपनी वेबसाइट पर ऑनलाइन उपलÞध कराई जाएंगी। बशतȶ ͩक सàपूण[ अवͬध के ͧलए उपरोÈत शतɟ का अनुपालन एĒीगेटर ɮवारा धाǐरत लाइसɅस कȧ अवͬध के साथ समाÜत हो जाएगा। 11.2. Ĝाइवरɉ के कãयाण के ͧलए, एĒीगेटर को Ǔनàनͧलͨखत शतɟ का अनुपालन सुǓनिæचत करना होगा, अथा[त्: (क) Ĥ×येक Ĝाइवर के ͧलए कम से कम 5 लाख ǽपये का èवाèØय बीमा सुǓनिæचत ͩकया जाएगा, िजसमɅ Ĥ×येक Ĝाइवर के ͧलए ĤǓत वष[ केÛġ सरकार ɮवारा अͬधसूͬचत ĤǓतशत के अनुसार वृɮͬध कȧ जाएगी। 14 मोटर यान एĒीगेटर ǑदशाǓनदȶश 2025 (ख) Ĥ×येक Ĝाइवर के ͧलए कम से कम 10 लाख ǽपये का आवͬधक बीमा सुǓनिæचत ͩकया जाएगा, िजसमɅ Ĥ×येक वष[ केÛġ सरकार ɮवारा अͬधसूͬचत ĤǓतशत के अनुसार वृɮͬध कȧ जाएगी। (ग) बशतȶ ͩक सामािजक सुर¢ा संǑहता, 2020 के अंतग[त बनाए गए Ĥावधान उप- खंड (क) और उप-खंड (ख) के संबंध मɅ अͬधसूͬचत और काया[िÛवत होने पर यह लागू हɉगे। (घ) आंतǐरक संसाधनɉ या अÛय संèथाओं के सहयोग से åयिÈतगत और आभासी Ĥͧश¢ण सğɉ के संयोजन के Ǿप मɅ वाͪष[क पुनæचया[ Ĥͧश¢ण काय[Đम आयोिजत करना और ऐसे पुनæचया[ Ĥͧश¢ण का ǐरकॉड[ रखना। (ङ) बशतȶ ͩक एĒीगेटर के साथ काय[ कȧ अवͬध के संदभ[ मɅ समान िèथǓत वाले सभी Ĝाइवरɉ मɅ से िजन Ĝाइवरɉ कȧ रेǑटंग 5 ĤǓतशत से कम है, उÛहɅ Ĥ×येक Ǔतमाहȣ मɅ अǓनवाय[ Ǿप से पुनæचया[ Ĥͧश¢ण काय[Đम मɅ शाͧमल होना होगा, ऐसा नहȣं करने पर Ĝाइवर, एĒीगेटर के माÚयम से अपनी सेवाएं Ĥदान नहȣं कर सकेगा। (च) यǑद ͩकसी याğी ɮवारा अͬधǓनयम, Ǔनयमɉ या इन Ǒदशा-Ǔनदȶशɉ के Ĥावधानɉ के उãलंघन के ͧलए चालक के ͪवǽɮध ͧशकायत दज[ कराई जाती है, तो ͧशकायत दज[ होने के Ǒदन से तीन (3) Ǒदनɉ कȧ अवͬध के भीतर एĒीगेटर ɮवारा जांच कȧ जाए और ऐसी जांच पूरȣ होने के बाद हȣ चालक के ͪवǽɮध उͬचत कार[वाई कȧ जाए। एĒीगेटर जांच पूरȣ होने पर याğी को उसके पǐरणाम के बारे मɅ सूͬचत करेगा। 11.3. एĒीगेटर ऑन-बोडȶड Ĝाइवरɉ से संबंͬधत दèतावेजɉ, जो सारथी पोट[ल से ͪवͬधवत Ĥमाͨणत हɉगे और ऐसे अÛय दèतावेज िजÛहɅ एĒीगेटर उͬचत समझे का ͫडिजटल ǐरकॉड[ रखेगा, िजनमɅ Ǔनàनͧलͨखत शाͧमल हɇ: (क) एक फोटो; (ख) Ĝाइͪवंग लाइसɅस कȧ मूल ĤǓत; (ग) सीएमवीआर मɅ ǓनǑद[çट पते के Ĥमाण के ͧलए èवीकाय[ दèतावेजɉ के साथ आवासीय पता Ĥèतुत करना; (घ) बɇक खाते का स×याͪपत ͪववरण; 15 मोटर यान एĒीगेटर ǑदशाǓनदȶश 2025 (ङ) दो आपातकालȣन संपक[ सूğɉ के नाम और पते के साथ संपक[ नंबर । 12. परͧमट एĒीगेटर यह सुǓनिæचत करेगा ͩक सभी मोटर यानɉ मɅ चालक सǑहत अͬधǓनयम के लागू Ĥावधानɉ के अंतग[त समुͬचत परͧमट हो। 13. यानɉ के संबंध मɅ अनुपालन 13.1. एĒीगेटर यह सुǓनिæचत करेगा ͩक ऑन-बोडȶड Ĝाइवरɉ से संबɮध मोटर यान Ǔनàनͧलͨखत शतɟ का अनुपालन करते हɉ: (क) वैध पंजीकरण हो; (ख) अͬधǓनयम के अनुसार वैध ͩफटनेस Ĥमाणपğ हो; (ग) सीएमवीआर मɅ ǓनǑद[çटानुसार पंजीकरण ͬचéन Ĥदͧश[त करना; (घ) वैध तृतीय-प¢ बीमा पॉͧलसी हो ; (ङ) कɅ ġȣय मोटर यान Ǔनयमावलȣ, 1989 के अंतग[त आवæयक वैध Ĥदूषण Ǔनयंğण Ĥमाणपğ हो। (च) ऐसे उ×सज[न मानदंड जो राÏय सरकार ɮवारा राÏय या राÏय के ͩकसी शहरȣ ¢ेğ के ͧलए, जैसा भी मामला हो, ǓनǑद[çट ͩकए गए हɉ; (छ) शहर ͪवͧशçट Ƀधन मानदंड; (ज) लागू मोटर यान कर और अÛय बकाया का भुगतान ͩकया हो; (झ) मोटर यान पर अͬधǓनयम के अंतग[त लगाए गए अपराधɉ और उãलंघनɉ से संबंͬधत कोई भी बकाया चालान ना हो; (ञ) मोटर यान (मोटरसाइͩकलɉ को छोड़कर) के अंदर Ĝाइवर के लाइसɅस और मोटर वाहन परͧमट (यǑद लागू हो) कȧ एक ĤǓत Ĥदͧश[त करɅ। उÈत ĤǓत Ĝाइवर के बगल वालȣ अगलȣ सीट के पीछे कȧ ओर इस तरह से Ĥदͧश[त होनी चाǑहए ͩक मोटर यान मɅ बैठे याǒğयɉ को èपçट Ǿप से Ǒदखाई दे; 16 मोटर यान एĒीगेटर ǑदशाǓनदȶश 2025 (ट) सीएमवीआर के Ǔनयम 125ज के तहत अǓनवाय[ Ǿप से एआईएस 140 के अनुǾप काया[×मक वाहन लोकेशन Ěैͩकंग ͫडवाइस या ͧसèटम, एक पैǓनक बटन के साथ सुसिÏजत हो और राÏय/संघ राÏय ¢ेğ सरकार ɮवारा èथाͪपत एकȧकृत कमांड और Ǔनयंğण कɅ ġ पर उपलÞध वाहन लोकेशन Ěैͩकंग ͫडवाइस से इलेÈĚॉǓनक फȧड के साथ एĒीगेटर के Ǔनयंğण क¢ से जुड़ा हुआ हो; (ठ) लागू कानून के अनुसार चाइãड लॉक मैकेǓनÏम को ǓनिçĐय कर Ǒदया हो (तीन पǑहया वाहनɉ, मोटर साइͩकलɉ और बसɉ को छोड़कर); (ड) कɅ ġȣय लॉͩकंग ͧसèटम के ͧलए मैनुअल ओवरराइड सͩĐय ͩकया गया हो (लागू कानून के अनुसार तीन पǑहया वाहनɉ, मोटर साइͩकलɉ, बसɉ को छोड़कर); (ढ) मोटर यान (मोटर साइͩकलɉ को छोड़कर) के अंदर उपयुÈत ¢मता का अिÊनशमन यंğ रखा गया हो; (ण) मोटर यान के अंदर एक Ĥाथͧमक ͬचͩक×सा ͩकट रखी हो। 13.2. एĒीगेटर ऐसे वाहनɉ को शाͧमल नहȣं करेगा, जो वाहन के Ĥारंͧभक पंजीकरण कȧ तारȣख से आठ वष[ से अͬधक समय से पंजीकृत हɇ और यह सुǓनिæचत करेगा ͩक उसके ɮवारा अपने वाहन मɅ शाͧमल सभी वाहनɉ को उनके Ĥारंͧभक पंजीकरण कȧ तारȣख से आठ वष[ से अͬधक समय नहȣं हुआ हो। 13.3. एĒीगेटर को अपने ɮवारा संचाͧलत सभी मोटर वाहनɉ के Ǔनàनͧलͨखत दèतावेजɉ और अͧभलेखɉ का स×यापन और रखरखाव करना होगा तथा वाहन पोट[ल पर वाèतͪवक समय के आधार पर इस डेटा को Ĥमाͨणत करना होगा: (क) पंजीकरण Ĥमाणपğ; (ख) अͬधǓनयम के अनुसार ͩफटनेस Ĥमाणपğ; (ग) चेͧसस और इंजन नंबर; (घ) तृतीय-प¢ बीमा पॉͧलसी; (ङ) Ĥदूषण Ǔनयंğण Ĥमाणपğ; तथा (च) ऑन-बोͫडɍग से पहले लंǒबत ई-चालानɉ कȧ संÉया और ऑन-बोͫडɍग से पहले उनका Ǔनपटान। 17 मोटर यान एĒीगेटर ǑदशाǓनदȶश 2025 14. वेबसाइट, ऐप और Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧ के संबंध मɅ अनुपालन 14.1. एĒीगेटर अपने èवाͧम×व, पंजीकृत पते, ͩकराया संरचना, Ēाहक सेवाओं के ͧलए संपक[ कȧ जानकारȣ, ई-मेल पता, इसके ɮवारा दȣ जाने वालȣ सेवाओं और अÛय Ĥासंͬगक ͪववरणɉ को दशा[ते हुए एक वेबसाइट को ͪवकͧसत और इसका अनुर¢ण करेगा। 14.2. ऐप को इस तरह से ͪवकͧसत ͩकया जाएगा ͩक यह लागू कानून के अनुǾप हो। 14.3. ऐप अंĒेजी, Ǒहंदȣ के साथ-साथ राÏय/संघ राÏय ¢ेğ, जहां आͬधकाǐरक भाषा Ǒहंदȣ नहȣं है, वहां कȧ आͬधकाǐरक भाषा मɅ उपलÞध होगा। 14.4. एĒीगेटर के ऐप कȧ भेɮयता और साइबर सुर¢ा को सीईआरटȣ-इन ɮवारा माÛयता ĤाÜत और सूचीबɮध साइबर सुर¢ा फम[ ɮवारा Ĥमाͨणत ͩकया जाएगा। 14.5. याğा का ͪववरण, याǒğयɉ का ͪववरण और ͩकराया सǑहत परंतु इÛहȣं तक सीͧमत न रहते हुए डेटा एĒीगेटर के ऐप पर तैयार ͩकया जाएगा और ͫडिजटल åयिÈतगत डेटा संर¢ण अͬधǓनयम, 2023 सǑहत लागू Ǔनयमɉ के अनुसार संĒहȣत ͩकया जाएगा। 14.6. चालक को Ǒदए जाने वाले ͩकराए और Ĥो×साहनɉ के Ǒहèसे का अनुपात, चालक ͩकराया और ͪवभािजत ͩकराया ͪववरण और अÛय जानकारȣ, जैसा भी राÏय सरकार ɮवारा अͬधसूͬचत ͩकया जाए, एĒीगेटर ɮवारा अपनी वेबसाइट और ऐप मɅ अɮयतन जानकारȣ साव[जǓनक करते हुए सुǓनिæचत ͩकया जाएगा। 14.7. ऐप मɅ एक ऐसी सुͪवधा शाͧमल होगी, जो याǒğयɉ को याğा पूरȣ होने तक अपनी लाइव लोकेशन (अविèथǓत) और याğा कȧ िèथǓत साझा करने मɅ स¢म बनाएगी, उसके बाद लाइव लोकेशन साझा करने कȧ सुͪवधा उपलÞध नहȣं होगी। 14.8. ऐप मɅ ͪवशेष सुͪवधाएं शाͧमल हɉगी, जो इसे Ǒदåयांगजनɉ के ͧलए सुलभ बनाती हɇ। 14.9. ऐप एĒीगेटर के ɮवारा ऐप पर ऑन-बोड[ (सवार) चालक कȧ èपçट और उÍच- ǐरज़ॉãयूशन वालȣ तèवीर Ĥदͧश[त करेगा। 18 मोटर यान एĒीगेटर ǑदशाǓनदȶश 2025 14.10. एĒीगेटर ɬयूटȣ पर रहने के दौरान ऑन-बोड[ चालकɉ के ͧलए मादक पदाथ[ या अãकोहल के उपयोग के ͧलए कठोर (जीरो टॉलरɅस) नीǓत तैयार करेगा और उसे लागू करेगा। एĒीगेटर अपनी नीǓत और इस संबंध मɅ ͧशकायत दज[ करने कȧ ĤͩĐया को अपनी वेबसाइट और अपने ऐप पर अपलोड करेगा। एĒीगेटर अपनी कठोर (जीरो टॉलरɅस) नीǓत के उãलंघन के आरोप वालȣ ͧशकायत ĤाÜत होने पर जांच लंǒबत रहने तक चालक को तुरंत और त×काल ऑफ-बोड[ कर देगा। एĒीगेटर ɮवारा जांच कȧ अवͬध के दौरान Ǔनलंबन जारȣ रहेगा। 14.11. याğा करने वाले चालक कȧ संपक[ संबंधी जानकारȣ याğा कȧ समािÜत से कम से कम सात (7) Ǒदनɉ के ͧलए ऐप के माÚयम से याğी को उपलÞध होगी; 14.12. एĒीगेटर 24x7 संचालन के साथ एक Ǔनयंğण क¢ èथाͪपत करेगा और यह सुǓनिæचत करेगा ͩक ऑनबोड[ ͩकए गए सभी मोटर वाहन Ǔनयंğण क¢ के साथ Ǔनबा[ध संपक[ बनाए रखɅ। Ǔनयंğण क¢ मोटर वाहनɉ और उसमɅ सवार चालकɉ कȧ गǓतͪवͬधयɉ पर नजर रखेगा। 14.13. एĒीगेटर एक सͩĐय टेलȣफोन नंबर और ई-मेल पते के साथ एक कॉल सɅटर èथाͪपत करेगा, जो इसकȧ वेबसाइट और ऐप पर èपçट Ǿप से Ĥदͧश[त होगा, जो 24x7 चालू रहेगा और अंĒेजी के साथ-साथ राÏय कȧ आͬधकाǐरक भाषा मɅ सहायता Ĥदान करेगा। ये कॉल सɅटर Ǔनàनͧलͨखत के ͧलए िजàमेदार हɉगे: (क) याğी और/या चालक या ͩकसी अÛय åयिÈत को याğा या सवार चालक आǑद से संबंͬधत मुɮदɉ के बारे मɅ कॉल सɅटर से संपक[ करने मɅ स¢म बनाना; (ख) याğी कȧ ͧशकायतɉ का Ǔनवारण सुǓनिæचत करना। 14.14. मोटर वाहन या एĒीगेटर ɮवारा Ǒदए गए सवार चालक से जुड़ी दुघ[टना या घटना कȧ जांच करने वाले ͪवͬधवत अͬधकृत अͬधकाǐरयɉ के साथ एĒीगेटर सहयोग करेगा। 19 मोटर यान एĒीगेटर ǑदशाǓनदȶश 2025 15. याǒğयɉ कȧ सुर¢ा सुǓनिæचत करने के ͧलए अनुपालन एĒीगेटर याǒğयɉ कȧ सुर¢ा से संबंͬधत Ǔनàनͧलͨखत शतɟ का अनुपालन सुǓनिæचत करेगा, अथा[त्: 15.1. मोटर वाहनɉ मɅ संèथाͪपत वाहन कȧ अविèथǓत और Ěैͩकंग ͫडवाइस, जैसा भी लागू हो, ठȤक से काय[ करते हɇ और इससे सूचना ĤाÜत होती है और साथ हȣ राÏय सरकार के इंटेĒेटेड कमांड एंड कंĚोल सɅटर से जुड़ी हुई हो। èपçटȣकरण: इन ǑदशाǓनदȶशɉ के Ĥयोजनɉ के ͧलए, वाहन कȧ अविèथǓत (लोकेशन) का पता लगाने वाले उपकरणɉ मɅ मोटरसाइͩकल और ǓतपǑहया वाहनɉ सǑहत सभी मोटर वाहनɉ के ͧलए इन-ऐप अविèथǓत Ěैͩकंग शाͧमल होगी। 15.2. चालक ऐप मɅ बताए गए माग[ का अनुसरण करेगा। एक अंतǓन[Ǒहत काय[ तंğ के माÚयम से और ͩकसी भी ͪवचलन के मामले मɅ, ऐप Ǔनयंğण क¢ को संकेत देगा, जो तुरंत चालक और याğी से संपक[ करेगा। 15.3. याǒğयɉ कȧ सुर¢ा, ͪवशेष Ǿप से बÍचɉ, मǑहलाओं और Ǒदåयांग याǒğयɉ कȧ सुर¢ा और लागू Ǔनयमɉ का अनुपालन सुǓनिæचत ͩकया जाना। 15.4. ऐप पर एक काय[ तंğ Ǒदया जाए ताͩक यह स×याͪपत ͩकया जा सके ͩक याğा करने वाले चालक कȧ पहचान ऑन-बोͫडɍग ĤͩĐया के दौरान पुͧलस ɮवारा पंजीकृत और स×याͪपत कȧ गई पहचान के समान है या नहȣं। 15.5. ऑन-बोड[ ͩकए गए मोटर वाहनɉ कȧ एĒीगेटर ɮवारा अͬधकृत कͧम[यɉ ɮवारा Ǔनयͧमत जांच कȧ जाती है। 16. एĒीगेटर ɮवारा अपनाई जाने वालȣ गैर-भेदभाव नीǓत एĒीगेटर, ऑन-बोड[ ͩकए गए चालकɉ या ऐसे ऑन-बोड[ ͩकए गए चालकɉ को मोटर वाहन उपलÞध कराने वाले ͩकसी तीसरे प¢ के èवाͧम×व वाले मोटर वाहनɉ को अपने èवाͧम×व वाले मोटर वाहनɉ के बराबर मानेगा। 20 मोटर यान एĒीगेटर ǑदशाǓनदȶश 2025 17. ͩकराये का ͪवǓनयमन 17.1. मोटर वाहनɉ कȧ संबंͬधत Įेणी या वग[ के ͧलए राÏय सरकार ɮवारा अͬधसूͬचत ͩकराया, एĒीगेटर से सेवाएँ ĤाÜत करने वाले याǒğयɉ से वसूला जाने वाला आधार ͩकराया होगा। 17.2. ǒबना याğी के याğा कȧ गई दूरȣ और याğा कȧ दूरȣ और याğी(ओं) को लेने के ͧलए उपयोग ͩकए गए Ƀधन सǑहत डेड माइलेज कȧ भरपाई के ͧलए Ûयूनतम तीन (3) ͩकलोमीटर के ͧलए लगाया गया आधार ͩकराया होगा। 17.3. एĒीगेटर को आधार ͩकराए से Ûयूनतम 50% कम और उप-खंड (17.1) के तहत ͪवǓनǑद[çट आधार ͩकराए का अͬधकतम दो गुना गǓतशील मूãय Ǔनधा[रण करने कȧ अनुमǓत होगी। 17.4. एĒीगेटर के साथ मोटर वाहन के साथ ऑनबोड[ ͩकए गए चालक को चालक के ͩकराए के तहत सभी लागतɉ सǑहत लागू ͩकराए का कम से कम 80% ĤाÜत होगा और शेष शुãक एĒीगेटर ɮवारा आबंǑटत ͩकराए के Ǿप मɅ रखा जा सकता है। चालक और एĒीगेटर के बीच समझौते के अनुसार भुगतान दैǓनक, साÜताǑहक या पाͯ¢क Ǿप से ͩकया जा सकता है, लेͩकन बाद मɅ नहȣं। 17.5. एĒीगेटर के èवाͧम×व वाले मोटर वाहनɉ के संबंध मɅ ऑनबोड[ ͩकए गए चालक को चालक ͩकराए मɅ ͪवǓनǑद[çट सभी लागतɉ सǑहत लागू ͩकराए का कम से कम 60% ĤाÜत होगा और शेष शुãक ͪवभािजत ͩकराए के Ǿप मɅ रखा जाएगा। 17.6. उप-खंड (17.4) या (17.5) के तहत कवर नहȣं ͩकए गए ͩकसी भी अÛय पǐरǺæय के संबंध मɅ, चालक को एĒीगेटर के साथ अपने समझौते के अनुसार भुगतान ĤाÜत होगा। 17.7. उन राÏयɉ मɅ जहां ͩकराया राÏय सरकार ɮवारा Ǔनधा[ǐरत नहȣं ͩकया गया है, ͩकराया ͪवǓनयमन के Ĥयोजनɉ के ͧलए एĒीगेटर ɮवारा आधार ͩकराया राÏय सरकार को अͬधसूͬचत ͩकया जा सकता है और जब तक राÏय सरकार ͩकराया Ǔनधा[ǐरत नहȣं करती है, तब तक इसका पालन ͩकया जाएगा। इसी Ĥकार, राÏय मɅ एĒीगेशन के ͧलए अनुमत अÛय Įेͨणयɉ के वाहनɉ के ͧलए Ǔनधा[रण राÏय सरकार ɮवारा ͩकया जाएगा। 21 मोटर यान एĒीगेटर ǑदशाǓनदȶश 2025 17.8. ͩकसी भी याğी से डेड माइलेज के ͧलए शुãक नहȣं ͧलया जाएगा, ͧसवाय इसके ͩक सवारȣ का लाभ उठाने कȧ दूरȣ उप-खंड (17.2) के तहत उिãलͨखत तीन (3) ͩकलोमीटर से कम हो और ͩकराया केवल याğा के आरंभ ǒबंदु से गंतåय ǒबंदु तक ͧलया जाएगा जहां याğी को छोड़ा जाता है। 18. याğा Ǔनरèत करना 18.1. ऐप पर याğा èवीकार करने के बाद चालक ɮवारा बुͩकंग Ǔनरèत करने पर, ͩकराए का 10% जुमा[ना लगाया जाएगा जो 100 ǽपये से अͬधक नहȣं होगा, बशतȶ ͩक ऐसा Ǔनरèतीकरण एĒीगेटर ɮवारा वैध कारण के ǒबना ͩकया गया हो और एĒीगेटर कȧ वेबसाइट और ऐप पर ͪवͬधवत और ͪवशेष Ǿप से उãलेख ͩकया गया हो। 18.2. ऐप पर याğा बुक करने के बाद याğी ɮवारा बुͩकंग Ǔनरèत करने पर, ͩकराए का 10% जुमा[ना लगाया जाएगा जो 100 ǽपये से अͬधक नहȣं होगा, बशतȶ ͩक ऐसा Ǔनरèतीकरण एĒीगेटर कȧ वेबसाइट और ऐप पर ͪवͬधवत और ͪवशेष Ǿप से उãलेख ͩकए ǒबना ͩकया गया हो। ऐसी ͩकराया राͧश चालक और एĒीगेटर के बीच उसी अनुपात मɅ ͪवभािजत कȧ जाएगी जैसा ͩक इन ǑदशाǓनदȶशɉ के खंड 15 के तहत बताया गया है। 19. जुमा[ना यǑद कोई जुमा[ना, जैसा ͩक ऊपर खंड 18 के तहत Ĥावधान ͩकया गया है, चालक या एĒीगेटर पर लगाया जाता है, तो उसे चालक या एĒीगेटर के खंड 17 मɅ ͪवǓनǑद[çट संबंͬधत Ǒहèसे से काट ͧलया जाएगा। 20. एĒीगेटस[ ɮवारा सतत Ýलȣट Ĥबंधन राÏय सरकार एĒीगेटस[ को Ǔनदȶश दे सकती है ͩक वे अपने बेड़े मɅ इलेिÈĚक, वैकिãपक Ƀधन या शूÛय उ×सज[न वाहनɉ का ĤǓतशत वाͪष[क आधार पर Đͧमक Ǿप से बढ़ाएँ। 21. Ǒदåयांगजन अनुकूल बेड़े को शाͧमल करना राÏय सरकार राÏय मɅ आवæयक Ǒदåयांगजन अनुकूल मोटर वाहनɉ कȧ पया[Üत संÉया Ǔनधा[ǐरत करेगी और एĒीगेटस[ को Ǔनदȶश देगी ͩक वे अपने बेड़े मɅ आनुपाǓतक Ǿप से ऐसे वाहनɉ को शाͧमल करɅ। 22 मोटर यान एĒीगेटर ǑदशाǓनदȶश 2025 22. इलेिÈĚक मोǒबͧलटȣ मɅ पǐरवत[न एĒीगेटर को अपने बेड़े मɅ इलेिÈĚक वाहनɉ को शाͧमल करने के ͧलए Ǔनधा[ǐरत लêयɉ का अǓनवाय[ Ǿप से पालन करना होगा। लêय वायु गुणवƣा को ͪवǓनयͧमत करने के ͧलए िजàमेदार एक उपयुÈत सरकारȣ संगठन या राÏय सरकार ɮवारा तय ͩकए जाएँगे। 23. एĒीगेटस[ ɮवारा गैर-पǐरवहन मोटरसाइͩकलɉ का एकğीकरण (एĒीगेशन) 23.1. राÏय सरकार एĒीगेटस[ के माÚयम से साझा मोǒबͧलटȣ के Ǿप मɅ याǒğयɉ ɮवारा याğा के ͧलए गैर-पǐरवहन मोटरसाइͩकलɉ के एकğीकरण कȧ अनुमǓत दे सकती है, िजसके पǐरणामèवǾप यातायात कȧ भीड़भाड़ और वाहन Ĥदूषण मɅ कमी आएगी, साथ हȣ अÛय बातɉ के साथ-साथ वहनीय याğी मोǒबͧलटȣ, हाइपरलोकल ͫडलȣवरȣ और आजीͪवका के अवसर उ×पÛन हɉगे। 23.2. राÏय सरकार अͬधǓनयम कȧ धारा 67 कȧ उप-धारा (3) के तहत अपनी शिÈतयɉ का Ĥयोग करते हुए याǒğयɉ ɮवारा याğा के ͧलए गैर-पǐरवहन मोटरसाइͩकलɉ के एĒीगेशन कȧ अनुमǓत दे सकती है। 23.3. राÏय सरकार अͬधǓनयम कȧ धारा 67 कȧ उप-धारा (3) के तहत एĒीगेटर पर गैर- पǐरवहन मोटरसाइͩकलɉ को ऐसे एĒीगेटर के माÚयम से याğा करने कȧ अनुमǓत देने वाले Ĥाͬधकरण जारȣ करने के ͧलए दैǓनक/साÜताǑहक/पाͯ¢क आधार पर शुãक लगा सकती है, जैसा ͩक राÏय सरकार ɮवारा Ǔनधा[ǐरत ͩकया जा सकता है। 23.4. इस खंड के अंतग[त एĒीगेटर ɮवारा चालकɉ कȧ ऑन-बोͫडɍग इन ǑदशाǓनदȶशɉ के अंतग[त Ǔनधा[ǐरत अनुपालन को पूरा करेगी। 24. एĒीगेटर कȧ लाईसɅस का Ǔनलंबन 24.1. एĒीगेटर को Ǒदये गए लाईसɅस को स¢म Ĥाͬधकारȣ ɮवारा ͧलͨखत कारणɉ से ("Ǔनलंबन आदेश"), या तो èवयं या एĒीगेटर के ͨखलाफ ͧशकायत ĤाÜत होने पर स¢म Ĥाͬधकारȣ ɮवारा कȧ गई जांच के बाद Ǔनलंǒबत ͩकया जा सकता है। 24.2. Ǔनलंबन कȧ अवͬध तीन (3) महȣने तक बढ़ाई जा सकती है। 23 मोटर यान एĒीगेटर ǑदशाǓनदȶश 2025 24.3. Ǔनलंबन आदेश स¢म Ĥाͬधकारȣ ɮवारा एĒीगेटर को ऐसी ͧशकायत ĤाÜत होने या कार[वाई शुǾ होने के दस (10) Ǒदनɉ के भीतर सुनवाई ͩकये जाने के बाद पाǐरत ͩकया जाएगा। 24.4. अÛय बातɉ के साथ-साथ Ǔनàनͧलͨखत आधारɉ को लाईसɅस के Ǔनलंबन के आधार के Ǿप मɅ माना जाएगा: (क) राÏय सरकार ɮवारा Ǔनधा[ǐरत ğैमाͧसक रेǑटंग मापदंडɉ के तक[ संगत ͪवæलेषण के माÚयम से याğी और/या चालक कȧ सुर¢ा सुǓनिæचत करने मɅ एĒीगेटर कȧ ͪवफलता; या (ख) याǒğयɉ से ͧलए जाने वाले ͩकराए के संबंध मɅ लगातार मामले, डायनाͧमक ͩकराए को अनुͬचत Ǿप से लगाना, Ĝाइवरɉ और एĒीगेटर के बीच ͩकराए के आनुपाǓतक ͪवभाजन के ͧलए ǑदशाǓनदȶशɉ का अनुपालन न करना, Ĝाइवरɉ पर Ǔनराधार शुãक लगाना; या (ग) Ĝाइवरɉ के साथ अनुबंध मɅ ǓनǑहत दाǓय×वɉ का अनुपालन करने मɅ एĒीगेटर कȧ ͪवफलता; या (घ) इन ǑदशाǓनदȶशɉ का अनुपालन करने मɅ एĒीगेटर कȧ ͪवफलता; (ङ) याǒğयɉ कȧ सुर¢ा और/या Ĝाइवरɉ के Ǒहत को खतरे मɅ डालना; (च) एĒीगेटर ɮवारा सुर¢ा मानकɉ का उãलंघन िजसके पǐरणामèवǾप सड़क दुघ[टनाएं होती हɇ; (छ) एĒीगेटर के खातɉ कȧ लेखापरȣ¢ा के माÚयम से ĤाÜत ͪवƣीय अǓनयͧमतताओं कȧ गंभीरता; और (ज) कोई अÛय पैरामीटर िजसे स¢म Ĥाͬधकारȣ ɮवारा उͬचत और उपयुÈत समझना। बशतȶ ͩक यǑद स¢म Ĥाͬधकारȣ कȧ राय है ͩक एĒीगेटर का लाईसɅस Ǔनलंǒबत करना समीचीन या åयवहाय[ नहȣं होगा, तो वह ऐसे एĒीगेटर पर जुमा[ना Ǔनधा[ǐरत कर सकता है और जुमा[ना लगा सकता है, जो कͬथत उãलंघन कȧ माğा और गंभीरता के आधार पर एक (1) करोड़ ǽपये तक होगा, लेͩकन एक (1) लाख ǽपये से कम नहȣं होगा। 24 मोटर यान एĒीगेटर ǑदशाǓनदȶश 2025 24.5. जब लाईसɅस को Ǔनलंǒबत ͩकया जाता है, तो एĒीगेटर लाईसɅस के तहत सभी पǐरचालनɉ को तुरंत रोक देगा जब तक ͩक Ǔनलंबन Ǔनरèत नहȣं हो जाता या Ǔनलंबन कȧ अवͬध समाÜत नहȣं हो जाती। (क) Ǔनलंबन कȧ अवͬध समाÜत होने से पहले, एĒीगेटर ͧलͨखत Ǿप मɅ वचनबɮधता के माÚयम से यह वचनबɮधता देगा ͩक Ǔनलंबन आदेश के तहत ǓनǑद[çट उसके Ǔनलंबन के आधार समाÜत हो गए हɇ। (ख) स¢म Ĥाͬधकारȣ इसके बाद Ǔनलंबन आदेश पाǐरत करने के आधारɉ के समाधान और एĒीगेटर ɮवारा वचनबɮधता कȧ ĤािÜत को èवीकार करते हुए एक और आदेश पाǐरत करेगा। (ग) इसके बाद, एĒीगेटर एक अवͬध के ͧलए पǐरचालन ͩफर से शुǾ करेगा जो दो (2) माह से कम नहȣं होगी, परंतु छह (6) महȣने तक बढ़ाई जा सकती है, ("पǐरवी¢ा अवͬध") िजसके दौरान, एĒीगेटर पǐरचालन जारȣ रखेगा और इन ǑदशाǓनदȶशɉ का अनुपालन सुǓनिæचत करेगा और इस अवͬध के दौरान कोई भी उãलंघन जो लाईसɅस के Ǔनलंबन के ͧलए कार[वाई का कारण बन सकता है, खंड (25) के तहत लाईसɅस को सीधे Ǔनरèत कर सकता है। 25. एĒीगेटर लाईसɅस को Ǔनरèत करना और उसे वापस करना 25.1. जहां, (क) एĒीगेटर ने तीन ͪवƣीय वषɟ कȧ अवͬध के भीतर अपना लाईसɅस Ǔनलंǒबत कर Ǒदया है और खंड 24 के तहत एक और उãलंघन ͩकया है जो Ǔनलंबन के ͧलए कार[वाई का कारण बन सकता है; या (ख) एĒीगेटर ने इन ǑदशाǓनदȶशɉ का उãलंघन ͩकया है या करवाया है, जो इस तरह कȧ गंभीर ĤकृǓत का है ͩक याğी या चालक कȧ सुर¢ा को खतरा हो। स¢म Ĥाͬधकारȣ ऐसे एĒीगेटर को कारण बताने के ͧलए नोǑटस जारȣ करेगा ͩक उÛहɅ Ǒदये गए लाईसɅस को Ǔनरèत Èयɉ नहȣं ͩकया जाना चाǑहए। 25 मोटर यान एĒीगेटर ǑदशाǓनदȶश 2025 25.2. स¢म Ĥाͬधकारȣ, उपयु[Èत खंड (25.1) के अधीन कारण बताओ नोǑटस जारȣ करने के दस (10) Ǒदनɉ के भीतर एĒीगेटर को सुनवाई का अवसर Ĥदान कर सकेगा और उसके बाद तक[ पूण[ आदेश के माÚयम से लाईसɅस Ǔनरèत करने या अÛयथा Ǔनण[य ले सकेगा तथा ऐसे समािÜत को अÛय राÏयɉ और कɅ ġ सरकार के सं£ान मɅ ला सकेगा। 25.3. जहां लाईसɅस Ǔनरèत ͩकया जाता है, एĒीगेटर लाईसɅस के तहत सभी पǐरचालन तुरंत बंद कर देगा। 25.4. स¢म Ĥाͬधकारȣ ɮवारा पाǐरत Ǔनरèतीकरण आदेश पर ĤǓतकूल Ĥभाव डाले ǒबना, सुर¢ा जमा जÞत हो जाएगी। 25.5. एĒीगेटर ͩकसी भी समय èवेÍछा से लाईसɅस सरɅडर कर सकता है और ऐसे सरɅडर पर, बकाया राͧश, यǑद कोई हो, के कारण कटौती के बाद सुर¢ा जमा एĒीगेटर को वापस कर दȣ जाएगी। 26. अपील 26.1. स¢म Ĥाͬधकारȣ ɮवारा पाǐरत ͩकसी Ǔनलंबन या Ǔनरèतीकरण के आदेश से åयͬथत एĒीगेटर, ऐसे आदेश कȧ ĤािÜत के तीस (30) Ǒदनɉ के भीतर, ͪववाǑदत आदेश के ͪवǽɮध अपील कȧ सुनवाई के ͧलए राÏय सरकार ɮवारा नामǓनǑद[çट अͬधसूͬचत अपीलȣय Ĥाͬधकारȣ को अपील कर सकता है। 26.2. अपील £ापन के Ǿप मɅ होगी, िजसमɅ अपील के आधारɉ को èपçट ͩकया जाएगा और उसके साथ राÏय सरकार ɮवारा Ǔनधा[ǐरत अपील के ͧलए अपेͯ¢त शुãक और स¢म Ĥाͬधकारȣ ɮवारा पाǐरत आदेश कȧ ĤǓत संलÊन करनी होगी। 26.3. अपीलȣय Ĥाͬधकारȣ एĒीगेटर को सुनवाई का अवसर Ĥदान करेगा तथा अपील दायर करने कȧ Ǔतͬथ से 60 Ǒदनɉ कȧ अवͬध के भीतर अपील पर Ǔनण[य करेगा। 26.4. अपील पर Ǔनण[य करते समय अपीलȣय Ĥाͬधकारȣ ऐसे आदेश पाǐरत करेगा, जैसा वह उͬचत समझे। 26 मोटर यान एĒीगेटर ǑदशाǓनदȶश 2025 27. राÏय सरकार कȧ शिÈतयां 27.1. राÏय सरकार ͧलͨखत नोǑटस के माÚयम से एĒीगेटर से ऐसी सूचना दèतावेज या अͧभलेख मांगने के ͧलए सशÈत होगी, जैसा वह एĒीगेटर ɮवारा इन ǑदशाǓनदȶशɉ का अनुपालन सुǓनिæचत करने के ͧलए उͬचत समझे। मांगी गई सूचना मɅ एĒीगेटर के ͪवǽɮध जांच करने कȧ शिÈत भी शाͧमल होगी। 27.2. राÏय सरकार एĒीगेटर को वाहन तथा सारथी पोट[ल के माÚयम से शाͧमल ͩकए गए वाहनɉ, चालकɉ तथा वाहन माͧलकɉ के ͪववरण को Ĥमाͨणत करने हेतु स¢म बनाएगी। 27 मोटर यान एĒीगेटर ǑदशाǓनदȶश 2025 Ĥपğ I [खंड 4.1 देखɅ] मोटर यान एĒीगेटर ǑदशाǓनदȶश, 2025 के तहत एĒीगेटर के ͧलए लाईसɅस Ĥदान करने हेतु आवेदन सेवा मɅ, [पदनाम], [राÏय का नाम] स¢म Ĥाͬधकारȣ, [राÏय का नाम] मोटर यान एĒीगेटर ǑदशाǓनदȶश, 2025 के अंतग[त राÏय [ राÏय का नाम] मɅ एĒीगेटर के Ǿप मɅ संचालन हेतु लाईसɅस Ĥदान करने के ͧलए आवेदन करता/करती हूँ । 1. पूरा नाम 2. Ĥधान काया[लय का पता 3. शाखा काया[लयɉ कȧ संÉया और उनके पते, यǑद कोई हɉ 4. (क) यǑदपंजीकृत कंपनी है तो संगम £ापन कȧ एक ĤǓत के साथ Ǔनगमन/पंजीकरण Ĥमाण पğ कȧ ĤǓतͧलͪप संलÊन करɅ। (ख) यǑद फम[ है तो फम[ के पंजीकरण Ĥमाण पğ कȧ ĤǓत संलÊन करɅ । 5. Ĥमुख Ĥबंधकȧय काͧम[क या अͬधकृत हèता¢रकता[ का नामऔर संपक[ ͪववरण 1. 2. 3. 6. टेलȣफोन नंबर, वेबसाइट पता और ई-मेल 7. संचाͧलत ͩकये जाने वाले Ĥèताͪवत वाहनɉ कȧ संÉया (Ĥ×येक वाहन के वाहन Đमांक तथा परͧमट ͪववरण, जैसा लागू हो, सǑहत एक पृथक सूची संलÊन करɅ) 8. जीपीएस/जीपीआरएस सुͪवधा का ͪववरण 9. अÛय अवसंरचना का ͪववरण 10. उन सव[रɉ के èथान का ͪववरण जहां डेटा संĒहȣत करने का 28 मोटर यान एĒीगेटर ǑदशाǓनदȶश 2025 Ĥèताव है 11. ͪपछले तीन ͪवƣीय वषɟ मɅ दाͨखल ǐरटन[ का ͪववरण । (ͪपछले तीन वषɟ के ͪवƣीय ͪववरणɉ कȧ ĤǓतयां संलÊन करɅ) 12. भुगतान ͩकये गए आवेदन शुãक का ͪववरण Ǿ. 13. ĤǓतभूǓत जमा का ͪववरण मɇ इस Ĥकार घोषणा करता/करती हूँ ͩक ऊपर दȣ गई जानकारȣ और इसके साथ संलÊन अÛय दèतावेज मेरे सवȾƣम £ान के अनुसार स×य हɇ। मɇ समझता/समझती हूँ ͩक यǑद ͩकसी भी समय कोई जानकारȣ गलत पाई जाती है, तो मुझे दȣ गई लाईसɅस Ǔनरèत ͩकया जा सकता है, साथ हȣ मेरे ͨखलाफ अÛय कानूनी कार[वाई/कार[वाई शुǾ कȧ जा सकती है। मɇने मोटर यान एĒीगेटर ǑदशाǓनदȶश, 2025 के Ĥावधानɉ को पढ़ ͧलया है, मɇ इसे और यहाँ उिãलͨखत संदͧभ[त ͪवधानɉ और Ǔनयमɉ का पालन करने के ͧलए èवीकार करता/करती हूँ और सहमत हूँ। èथान: तारȣख: आवेदक/Ĥाͬधकृत हèता¢रकता[ के हèता¢र (कंपनी कȧ मुहर के साथ, जैसा लागू हो) 29 मोटर यान एĒीगेटर ǑदशाǓनदȶश 2025 Ĥपğ II [खंड 7.2 देखɅ] मोटर यान एĒीगेटर ǑदशाǓनदȶश, 2025 के तहत एĒीगेटर के ͧलए लाईसɅस के नवीनीकरण के ͧलए आवेदन सेवा मɅ, [पदनाम], [राÏय का नाम] स¢म Ĥाͬधकारȣ, [राÏय का नाम] मɇ, मोटर यान एĒीगेटर ǑदशाǓनदȶश, 2025 के अंतग[त राÏय [ राÏय का नाम] मɅ एĒीगेटर के Ǿप मɅ संचालन हेतु लाईसɅस Ĥदान करने के ͧलए आवेदन करता हूँ । 1. पूरा नाम 2. मुÉय काया[लय का पता 3. शाखा काया[लयɉ कȧ संÉया और उनके पते, यǑद कोई हɉ तो 4. (क) यǑद पंजीकृत कंपनी है तो संगम £ापन कȧ एक ĤǓत के साथ Ǔनगमन/पंजीकरण Ĥमाण पğ कȧ ĤǓतͧलͪप संलÊन करɅ। (ख) यǑद फम[ है तो फम[ के पंजीकरण Ĥमाण पğ कȧ ĤǓत संलÊन करɅ । 5. Ĥमुख Ĥबंधकȧय काͧम[क या अͬधकृत हèता¢रकता[ का नाम और संपक[ ͪववरण 1. 2. 3. 6. टेलȣफोन नंबर, वेबसाइट पता और ईमेल पता 7. संचाͧलत ͩकये जाने हेतु Ĥèताͪवत (वाहन का Ĥकार) कȧ संÉया। (Ĥ×येक वाहन के वाहन Đमांक और परͧमट ͪववरण सǑहत एक अलग सूची संलÊन करɅ) 8. जीपीएस/जीपीआरएस सुͪवधा का ͪववरण 9. अÛय अवसंरचना का ͪववरण 30 मोटर यान एĒीगेटर ǑदशाǓनदȶश 2025 10. उन सव[रɉ के èथान का ͪववरण जहां डेटा संĒहȣत करने का Ĥèताव है 11. ͪपछले तीन वषɟ मɅ दाͨखल ǐरटन[ का ͪववरण। (ͪपछले तीन वषɟ के ͪवƣीय ͪववरणɉ कȧ ĤǓतयां संलÊन करɅ) 12. लाईसɅस का ͪववरण : (क) लाईसɅस संÉया (ख) Ǔनलंबनɉ कȧ संÉया, यǑद कोई हो, तथा उसका Þयौरा 13. भुगतान ͩकये गये शुãक का ͪववरण ǽ. 14. ĤǓतभूǓत जमा का ͪववरण मɇ इस Ĥकार घोषणा करता/करती हूँ ͩक ऊपर दȣ गई जानकारȣ और इसके साथ संलÊन अÛय दèतावेज मेरे सवȾƣम £ान के अनुसार स×य हɇ। मɇ समझता/समझती हूँ ͩक यǑद ͩकसी भी समय कोई जानकारȣ गलत पाई जाती है, तो मुझे दȣ गई लाईसɅस को Ǔनरèत ͩकया जा सकता है, साथ हȣ मेरे ͨखलाफ अÛय कानूनी कार[वाई/कार[वाई शुǾ कȧ जा सकती है। मɇने मोटर यान एĒीगेटर ǑदशाǓनदȶश, 2025 के Ĥावधानɉ को पढ़ ͧलया है, मɇ इसे और यहाँ उिãलͨखत संदͧभ[त ͪवधानɉ और Ǔनयमɉ का पालन करने के ͧलए èवीकार करता हूँ और सहमत हूँ। èथान: तारȣख: आवेदकɉ के हèता¢र Ĥाͬधकृत हèता¢रकता[ (कंपनी कȧ मुहर के साथ, जैसा लागू हो) 31 मोटर यान एĒीगेटर ǑदशाǓनदȶश 2025 Ĥपğ III [खंड 4.7 देखɅ] मोटर यान एĒीगेटर ǑदशाǓनदȶश, 2025 के अधीन एĒीगेटर के ͧलए लाईसɅस [_________] को मोटर यान एĒीगेटर ǑदशाǓनदȶश, 2025 के तहत Ǔनधा[ǐरत Ǔनदȶशɉ के अनुपालन मɅ मोटर यान अͬधǓनयम, 1988 के तहत एĒीगेटर के Ǿप मɅ काम करने का लाईसɅस Ǒदया जाता है । 1. एĒीगेटर का पूरा नाम 2. मुÉय काया[लय का पता 3. शाखा काया[लयɉ कȧ संÉया और उनके पते, यǑद कोई हɉ 4. टेलȣफोन नंबर, वेबसाइट पता और ईमेल पता 5. ऑटो ǐरÈशा/ई-ǐरÈशा/मोटर कैब/मोटर साइͩकल या बस कȧ संÉया (एĒीगेटर ɮवारा Ĥपğ I/II मɅ संलÊन सूची के अनुसार, जो भी लागू हो) 6. एĒीगेटर ͩकस Ĥकार काय[ करेगा इसका ͪववरण 7. भुगतान ͩकये गये आवेदन शुãक का ͪववरण 8. ĤǓतभूǓत जमा का ͪववरण लाईसɅस धारȣ को मोटर यान एĒीगेटर ǑदशाǓनदȶश, 2025 मɅ ǓनǑहत सभी शतɟ का पालन करना होगा। èथान: तारȣख: स¢म Ĥाͬधकारȣ के हèता¢र